# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt3
**Total Pages:** 13

---

## Page 1

50 THE SOUTH AFRICAN BUGHWAN, Dennis, photographer; b. In- anda, Natal, 1925; s. of late R. Bughwan; m. Devi, d. of Bhoo- lasingh, of Malvern, Natal; 2 s., 1 d. Bus.: Proprietor of Crown Studios, 119 Queen St.. Dbn., branch at 381 Church St., Pmb., business was estd. by his late father, being one of the leading photographers in S.A. Was direc. of Pakco (Pty.), Ltd., Verulam, Natal. Rec.: Table tennis. Add.: Bus., 119 Queen Street. Durban, Phone 27031; Res., 21 Hes- wall Road, Durban, Phone 45098. —— BUGHWAN, Devi, M.A.; Broadcaster (S.A.B.C.) and lecturer Clairwood Ind. High Sch.; conducts Indian session of S.A.B.C. on Sunday mornings; actively engaged with husband Dennis Bugh- wan in photogr. bus.; b. Mayville, Durban, May 15, 1926; d. of Bhoolasingh; educ. St. Aidan’s Girls’ School and Dbn. Girls’ H.S.; m. Dennis Bughwan, s. of late R. Bughwan of Dbn.; 2 s., 1 d. After matriculating at the Dbn. Girls’ H.S. proceeded to Fort Hare College and obtained the B.A. degree with distinction in English at the tender age of 18; on her return she joined the staff of Dartnell Crescent Sch. as a teacher; in 1947 married Dennis Bughwan, well known photo- grapher of Durban; in 1949 she obtained the M.A. degree in English, being the first Indian woman in South Africa and to date the only South African Indian woman to obtain this degree in South Africa; lectured in English at University of Natal in 1951; an accomplished amateur stage actress who has appeared in many prominent stage productions from time to time; interested in the educational, religious and cultural activities of the community; she is sec. of the Film Society (Durban International Club); visited England and the Continent in 1955. Recrea- tion: Table tennis. Address: Bus., 119 Queen Street, Durban, Phone 27031; Res., 21 Heswall Road, Dur- ban, Phone 45098. INDIAN WHO’S WHO BUGHWANDEEN, J.; b. Reunion, Natal, 1919; sec. Non-European Railway Passengers’ Assoc.; commis- sioner Non-European Railways; commissioner of oaths. Address: Res., 69 Umbilo Road, Durban and 43 Surbiton Road, Merebank, Natal, Phone 8-7554. BULSARA, Mohanlall Kassan, merchant; b. Bulsara, Dist. Surat, 1912; s. of Kassan Chiba; educ. India and Cape Town; m. Bhanoo Ben, d. of N. F. Bandsda of P.E.; 3 s.; formerly assoc. with father’s business, later traded in company with brother at Kloof Street, Cape Town; estd. own bus. trading as M. K. Bulsara, Public activities: Mem. Hindu Mochee Maha Sabha of S.A.; mem. Mochee Soc. C.T.; was mem. of Bharat C.C., C.T.; visited India several times. Recreation: Cricket and motoring. Address: Res., 1 Malan St., Cape Town, Phone 29677; Bus., 124 Kloof Street, Cape Town, Phone 32920. BUNDHOO, Dasarath (Kovid), b. 8th April, 1921, at Plessislaer; 3rd _s. of Mr. & Mrs. R. Bundhoo; m. Dur- gawathie, dio. Mrs. & the late F. Satyapal; educ. Sutherlands In- dian School and self studies; passed several higher examinations with merit; also awarded Hindi Dip- loma of Wardha, In- dia. Public activities: Sec./treas. Plessislaer Arya Samaj, 1939-58; H.L.V.P. _ Plessislaer A.S.; officially opened Arya Samaj hall, Plessislaer, in 1950; reprst. Leather- workers at National Congresses and Industrial Coun- cil meetings since 1947; vice-pres. S.A. Federation of Leather Trade Unions; chairman Nat. U. of Leather- workers (Pmb.); sec. Hindi Org. Comm. of Pmb.; council mem. of V.D.S., Pmb.; hon. auditor of Mt. Partridge Arya Samaj and Plessislaer Stree Samaj; delegate to Arya Pratinidhi Sabha (S.A.); delegate to H.M.S. (S.A.); delegate to Hindi Shiksha Sangh (S.A.); delegate to Nat. Ind. Council of Leather In- dustry of S.A.; producer/writer of the plays “Prince of Ayodhya” and “The Great Charioteer”; also writer of other plays in Hindi and English; awarded Ist prize in Hindi debating competition; won the Swami Bhawani Dayal debating trophy in 1952 and 1956; appointed commissioner and examiner of Hindi exams. by the Hindi Shiksha Sangh of S.A. Sports: Ex-treas. and comm. mem. of Plessislaer United T.C.; ex-vice-pres. of Plessislaer United F.C.; organiser of inter-race sports for workers. Address: P.O. Plessis- laer, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN BUNDHOO, Durga- wathie D., 2nd d. of Mrs. and the late F. Satyapal, of Pmb.; m D. Bundhoo in 1947; educ. St. Anthony’s Sch. & Pmb. Indian Girls Sch. and Wood- lands Ind. High Sch.; was on the staff of Methodists’ Ind. Sch. 1942-47; headmistress of Raisethorpe Platoon Sch., 1954/56. Public activ.: Chair- lady of Woodlands Girls’ Social Club, 1940/41; Comman- dant of the Red Cross 1943-47; interested in guiding; treas., now sec. of Pietermaritzburg Indian Women’s Ass.; pres. of Plessislaer Arya Stree Samaj; vice-pres. Arya Pra- tinidhi Sabha S.A.; patron Old Girls Club; comm. mem, of Pietermaritzburg Stree Samaj; mem. of N.C.W.; organiser of several fetes in aid of charity. Address: P.O, Plessislaer, Natal. CADER, Hoosen, b. Cape Town, March 29 SSI, Ss of Abdul Cader; educ. Cape Town; m. Zohra, 4 s., 4 dy assisted father in bus. at Port Elizabeth and later moved to Cape Town & estd. cafe trading under name of Hoosain Cader; opened branch at 2 Junction Road, Salt River; mem. of Surty Moslem Society; takes keen interest in mat- ters affecting Moslem community. Recrea- tion: Cricket. Address: 118 Hanover Street, Cape Town and 2 Junction Road, Salt River, Phone 53714. CALLAKOPPEN, Subhrey; general retail butcher; b. Germiston, May 25, 1925; s. of Poonsamy Calla- koppen; educ. Singh’s Govt. Ind. School; m. Rook- money, d. of S. M. Naidoo; 2 s., 1 d. Business: Medina Meat Market, est. 1950. Public activities: Hon. treas. East Rand I. Dist. F. Assn.; vice-pres. Germiston Indian Sports Board of Control; hon. life vice-pres. Happy Hearts F.C.; council mem. Blue Tennis Club; mem. Happy Hearts F.C.; plays tennis. Address: 868 Ist Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston. CARA, Bhowan, gen. merchant; b. 1919, Vankanar, India; e.s. of late Cara, of India; educ. India and St. Paul’s Sch.; m. e.d. of M. Bhaga, 2 s., 4 d. Arrived from India 1913; assoc. with late father’s bus. at 478a Church St.; estd. own bus. at Raisethorpe. Rec.: Motoring. Add.: 478a Church St., Pietermaritzburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 51 CAJEE, Moinoddin, Accnt. & Travel Agt.; Dir. of Co.; Sec. of Co.; b. Tadkeswer, District Surat, India; s. of Hesamoddin Cajee; educ. Middle- burg Ind. and Col. Govt. Sch. Sch. of Accntncy.; widower, 2 s. Bus.: Dagbreek Cafe, est. 1955; Saloo- jee Cajee & Co., gen. agents. Mem. Trans- vaal Muslim League; International Soc. (Pty.). Ltd. Income tax, immigration con- sultant. Interested in Bantu Men’s Social Club. Address: 25a Becker St., Ferreirastown, Johannesburg. CASSAN, Peter Maurice, salesman; b. Sept. 13, 1922, P.E.; e. s. of P. M. Cassan, of Seymour, Cape; educ. St. Peters and Paterson High School, P.E.; m. y. d. of A. E. Jonathan (Iris). Bus.: Was associated with father’s bus., 1937-48; settled E.L., 1949; played football for Merchants F.C.; rep- resented Border F.A. 1952-56; treas. Swaraj Tennis Club since ath : : 1954; mem. Bluebells F.C. Rec: Sport. Address: 14 Walker Street, East London. CASSAN, Peter Mithal, gen. dlr.; b. June 16, 1887, Boda- lia, Surat, India; s. of Cassan Parshotam; educ. India; Business: estd. bus. at Seymour 1917; opened branch at Hertzog; during the Boer War was a post boy for Mahatma Gandhi; a leading businessman in the dist. & well respected by all sections of the community; visited In- dia 1912, 1948 & 1954. Add.: P. M. Cassan, Seymour, Cape Prov.

---

## Page 2

52 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO The Khan Bahadur Cassim Adam Family the Indians and others at Pretoria. Made several pilgrimages to Mecca, and toured the Middle East extensively. Presented a Loyal Address to the late King George V on the occasion of his silver jubilee; was a member of the Philatelist Society since 1900. Died on Oct. 10, 1942. Abmed Hajee Ismail, b. June 30, 1933; matriculated at Pretoria Indian Boys’ High School in 1953, and now Bachelor of Commerce student at Witwatersrand University. Keen cricket enthusiast. Associated with father’s business. Kk * CASSIM, Adam, Raj Mantree (was Councillor of the State of Porbandar) July, 1936, Khan Bahadur (equivalent to hon.), Commissioner for Oaths; b. Ranavav, dist. Kathiwar, August 3, 1881. Came with parents to Natal in 1894; educ. Boys’ Model Primary School, Durban, till 1896. He returned to India 1897, arrived back 1901, established own business at Pretoria, first as general retail dealer, then as wholesale and direct importer, was a large property owner. Was chairman of Ranavav Unjuman Islam. President of the T.I.C. He deputised for the Transvaal British Indian Assn. to interview the Secretary of State for India and Sir Sunkeran Nair in London in 1920. Co-opted member of the S.A.I.C. Was a member of the deputation to India in connection with the Class Areas Bill and was present at the interview, with the then Viceroy, Lord Reading in 1926; was a member of the Congress Consulting Executive Committee at Cape Town in 1932, during the period of Fazli Hussain delegation, Vice-Pres. and former Treas. of the S.A.I.C.; created Khan Bahadur, the only Indian in South Africa and the first Meman in Kathiawad to be so honoured. Was a_ generous donor to public appeals in con- junction with the Hospital Board, erected the Cassim Adam Ward in Pretoria Hos- pital. Had a library opened for CASSIM, Adam, Hajee Ismail Hajee, company dir.; e. s. of late Khan Bahadur Hajee Cassim Adam, b. Ranavay, 1906; educ, Rana- vav and Pretoria. Came to South Africa in 1915, became director of Cassim Adam & Co., Ltd., whole- sale merchants. On the death of his father con- tinued to conduct the busi- ness as managing director. Has travelled extensively: Europe, Middle East, India, Pakistan and the Americas. Was in London for the Coronation of George VI GRANDSONS and Queen Elizabeth. One of South Africa’s most pro- Farouk, Hajee Ismail, b. gressive businessmen. Dur- January 4, 1944; educ. ing the course of his travels Indian. Government School, had the opportunity of Pretoria, meeting several influential people in the sphere of commerce and Government. Address: 163 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria, Box 883, T.A., “Casimkala”. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 53 THE FRONT VIEW OF THE CASSIM ADAM WARD AT PRETORIA: Inset the donor, Khan Bahadur Hajee Cassim Adam, who generously contributed £1.400, half the total costs of the building, for the accommodation of Indian patients. The block forms part of the Pretoria General Hospital. The Library is also the gift of the Khan Bahadur. CASS Lit ADAM (FREE ADMUSsIUID

---

## Page 3

34 THE SOUTH AFRICAN CASSIM, Ebrahim, M.B., B.Ch. (Rand); s. of Mahomed Mandvi Cassim; b. Pietermaritzburg, October 17, 1925; educ. Woodlands High School; after housemanship at St. Aidan’s Hospital, Durban, established a practice at Newcastle, 1955; now practising at Edendale, Natal. Public activities: Patron Edendale Youth Club; hon. sec. Edendale branch of Liberal Party of S.A., 1954-56, com. mem. Edendale Mosque and Madressa Trust, patron Pietermaritzburg County F.A. Recreation: Cricket (captain of Eden- dale Club,1955-56), Address: Box 7, Edendale, Natal. CASSIM, Essack Mohamed, general dealer; b. Cape Town; educ. Salt River School; after leaving school started business in Claremont, opened branch at 97 Albert Road, Woodstock, also at 20 Station Road, Woodstock; trading as Cassim Store. Public activities: Takes keen interest in affairs of the Moslem community. Address: 20 Station Road, Woodstock, Cape Town. CASSIM, Moosa Hajee, general merchant; b. Louis Trichardt; e. s. of late Cassim Suleman; m. d. of Cassim Hajee Sacoor of Durban; now trading in Johannesburg under the style of Cassim Suleman & Sons; educ. at Louis Trichardt; since 1928, engaged in bus.; secretary to Cassim Suleman Ltd. Public activities: Takes an active part in the affairs of the Indian community in the Transvaal; made a pilgrim- age to Mecca in 1935; provided water at the cost of 4,000 rupees in one of the villages in India, in memory of his late father. Recreation: Sport and music. Address: Residence, 42 Lovers Walk, Flat 5, Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 335793; Business, 2 Adams Arcade, Phone 330695, Johannesburg. CASSIM, Samsoodeen, bookkeeper; s. of Samsoodeen; b. in Johannesburg on Feb. 1, 1910; educ. Johannes- burg Ind. Govt. School; m. Jugrani, d. of Gosai Maharaj; 1 s. Public activities: Sec. Rangers F.C.; hon. sec. T.I.F. Assn. 1934; vice-pres. and auditor Wits. Ind. F. Assn.; asst. sec. T. Col. C. Union 1928; mem. Vredons C.C.; foundation mem. Rangers Tennis Club; auditor S.A.I. Lawn Tennis Assn.; hon. sec. T.I. Congress (Germiston branch); mem. Germiston Green T.C. and Indian Sports Board. Address: 963 2nd St.. Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston, Transvaal; P.O. Box 56. CASOOJEE, Suliman Ebrahim, Commissioner of Oaths; b. Lachpur, Sachin, June 13, 1880. Came to S.A. in 1896. First settled in the Tvl. but on the out- break of the Boer War removed to East London in 1899; engaged as gen. dir. since 1899; is a large property owner. Public activities: Engaged in public work ever since his arrival in East London; executive mem. S.A.1.C.; repres. East London at various sessions of the S.A.IL.C. Conferences; chairman and _ trustee, Anjuman Islam; takes a leading part in the Indian public life of his town. Address: Business, 62 St. Paul’s Road. East London, Phone 2826; Residence, 35 St. John’s Road. East London. INDIAN WHO’S WHO CHAGANLAL, Gandabhai, tailor; b. Dabhee, Navsari, India, 1914; s.o. G. Jhinabhai; educ. India and S.A.; m. Vajia, d.o. N. Visram; 3 s., 3 d.; arrived in S.A., 1927; settled in Johannesburg; trading as C. Gandabhai; was mem. Transvaal Darjee Mandal; assoc, with all activities affecting the Indian com- munity in Johannesburg. Address: 5 Pioneer Road, Fordsburg. Johannesburg, Phone 336693. CHAITHU, Behari Merai; b. Springfield, Durban, in 1908; ¢. s. of Merai; educ. private study, English & Hindi: m. Dukpathi d. of Jorie, Mayville; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Whole- sale fruit and veg.; Avalon Fruit Co., est. 1938; stalls, Ind. Mar- ket, Victoria Street; Govt. contractors and suppliers to ships, hos- pitals and hotels; ex- director Varcoes Gar- age (Pty.), Ltd. First Indian to instal] the largest non-European cold storage in the Union. Public activities: Co- founder of Candalla Estate Hindu Sungatan Girls’ Sch.; pres. of School Board and treas. for 18 years; patron of Arya Samaj, Cato Manor, and other sport- ing bodies; mem. Sava Prithinidi Sabha. Toured India in 1950. Recreation: Football. Address: Bus., 22 Strat- ford Road; Res., 185 Forty-Fifth Avenue, Mayville, Durban. CHAVDA, Baberbhai Dajeebhai, C.O.;_ b. Gadat-Gandevi, 1908; e. s. of Dajee Parsot- ham Chavda; educ. Gadat, Baroda State and Cape Town; m. Kesharbhen, sister of S. K. Marchant, of P.E., 2 s. 4 d. Came to S.A. with father; interested in radio engineering, photog- raphy; conducts in- surance agency and fruiterers bus. Public activities: General sec. of the United Hindu Assn., 1924-32; vice-pres, of the Cape Indian Assn.; president of the S.A. Mochi Mahasabha, 1943-47; president of the Mochi Mahasabha Educational Trust; treasurer of the Passive Resistance Council of Cape; president of the United Hindu Assn.: trustee of the United Hindu Assn.; president of the Kshatria Mitra Mandal Soc., 1940-46; president Educational and Cultural Inst.; secretary of the Hindu Viddya Mandir; editor of “Yuvak,” 1927-28. Recreation: Motoring; Address: 102 Main Road, Mowbray, Cape Town, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 55 > ‘The Hajee Omar Cassim Family €© of Pretoria CASSIM, Hajee Omar, company director: b. Ranavav, India, 1902, arrived m S.A. 1915 and settled in Pretoria; educ. Ranavav. Estd. bus. trading as O. H. Cassim & Co., wholesale mer- chants, 1937. A leading figure in S.A. Ind. commercial circles, and takes a full and active part in the public life of the community. Address: 159 Prinsloo St., Pretoria, P.O. Box 1071, Phone 3709, Tel. Add., “Cassim”. CASSIM, Mahomed Siddique, son of Hajee Omar Hajee Cassim; b. Pretoria. This cup was donated by Hajee Omar H. Cassim in memory of his late son Mahomed Farouk, to the Pretoria and District Muslim Football Association, and is at present being competed for in the Senior League Cup Competition, The trophy was specially made in Sialkot, Pakistan. It is bigger than the F.A. Cup (international), weighs 170 ozs. of solid silver, is 31in. high and cost £400. i

---

## Page 4

56 THE SOUTH AFRICAN CHAND, Dhonday, radiotrician; b. Durban, 1920; s.o. late Mr. Dhonday of Durban; educ. at Clairwood Indian School; 2 s., 3 d.; visited India in 1936; studied at National Radio and Industrial Training College, Calcutta, for 4 years; on arrival back in S.A. worked in Jchannesburg and Jater moved to Durban, conducting own business. Takes an active part in the affairs of the Indian community. Recreation: Angling and boating. Address: 143 Sirdar Road, Clairwood, Durban. CHEDIE, _Beharilal, businessman; b. Lady- smith, Feb. 12, 1919; educ. Ladysmith Gvt. Ind. Sch., now known as Windsor H.S.; d. of Bhagoo, of Pmb.; 2 s. 3 d. Business: After leaving sch. estd. gnrl dirs., green grcr., bus. trading as B. Chedie. Public activi- ties: Hon. treas. Sana- than Dharma Sabha; com. mem. Young Hindu Cultural Ser- vice Soc.; helped to establish Hindi Sch.; exec. mem. of N.LC., Ladysmith branch; official Ladysmith Rent and Rate Payers’ Assoc; took a keen interest in the Group Areas work in Ladysmith. Recreation: Gardening and reading. Address: 48 Kandhan Avenue, Ladysmith, Phone 484. CHETTY, A. P., insurance agent; b. Illovo, March 19, 1913; s.o. P. Chetty; Public activities: Hon. treasurer Isipingo Tamil School committee and Sri Siva Soobramoniar Temple, Isipingo; vice-president Jacobs Indian Cemetery committee. Address: 118 Horseshoe Road, Clairwood, Durban. CHETTY, Appatho- ray Vythialingum, re- tired businessman; b. Kimberly, 1891; s.o. A. Chetty; educated Higher Grade Sch., Pmb.; m. Meenat- chee; I s., 1 d.; one of the founders of the Tamil Benefit Soc. in Pageview; sec. and founder Crimson Lea- gue F.C., Tvl.; was in bus. for 25 years in the TvI.; a generous donor towards the Hindu Maha Sabha bldg. fund, Benoni. Add.: 24b 24th Street, Pageview, Johannesburg, Phone 353198. INDIAN WHO’S WHO CHETTY, Arumugam Munsamy, gen. mer- chant; b. Merebank, Natal, 1906; s. of M. M. Chetty; educ. Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch., Dbn.; m. Dhanam, d. of C. Gangan; 4 s., 3 d.; was assoc. with father’s business, now trading in partnership with son. Public act.: Vice-chairman Tamil Educ. Soc; keenly in- terested in religion: officiates at Tamil funerals. Rec.: Read- ing (Tamil & English literature). Add.: Res., 20 Brook Street, Cape Town, Phone 26052; business, 137 Sir Lowry Road. CHETTY, Athielutch- mee, storekeeper; b. Dbn., Nov. 25, 1917: 3rd d. of late Mr. R. Alfred Chetty; educ. Dartnell Crescent Ind. Girls’ H. Sch., Dbn.; trading as Alfred’s Bazaar, at 799 Um- geni Rd., Dbn. Pub- lic act.: Life vice-pres. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; former treas. Dbn. Ind. Women’s League; now member Dbn. Ind. Women’s Assn.; patron Clare Estate Andhra Vishnu Sch. Trust; president Springvale School committee; vice-president Spring- vale Property Owners’ Assn.; president Ramakrishna Centre Women’s Circle; president Glenanil Educ. Soc.; patron Vedic Sanmaska Ed. Soc.; vice-president Glen- anil Property Owners’ Assn.; vice-president Springvale Hindu Patasala & Hindu Women’s Circle. Hobby: Gardening. Address: “Andra Villa,’ Springvale, Avoca; business, 779 Umgeni Road, Durban, Natal. CHETTY, Dr. B. Theagarajan, M.B., Ch.B. (Edin.); b. 1919; practising at res. Address: Res., 9 Glencairn Road, Overport, Durban. CHETTY, Chinnasamy Govindasamy, brassware manufacturer; b. Pietermaritzburg, 1900; e.s. of Mr. S. C. Chetty, of Durban; m. Balamal, e.d. of Mr. S. R. Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; !Is., 6d.; educ. South Coast Junction Govt.-aided Indian School; pioneered brassware industry in S.A., trading as Crafto Brass- ware Manufacturers. Public activities: Secretary to Natal Tamil Vedic Soc. Address: Residence, 103 North Street, Durban, Phone 25615; business, 781 Umgeni Road, Durban, Phone 38686. THE SOUTH AFRICAN CHETTY, Chinappan Ruthnam, B.A; teacher; b. Dann- hauser, Aug. 17, 1918; s. of Chinnappan Chetty; m. Sornakan- thi, d. of Pachai; 2 s., 2 ds educ. Dann- hauser Primary Ind. Sch.. Sastri College; staff, St. Oswalds H. Sch.; played soccer. Newcastle J.F.C.; rep. North. Dist. LF.A., 1943-44, vice-pres. N.D.LF.A.; treas. N.D.LF.A. 1945; held other positions as well; played cricket for schools; captain Newcastle Tennis Club; secretary H.Y.M.A., 1950-55; secretary Newcastle Indian Parents’ Assn., 1954-55; joint secretary Newcastle Indian Child Welfare Soc.; president N.ILT.S. (New- castle branch); first secretary Northern Districts Ind. Sch. Crick.; also taught at Fairbreeze, Niget (TvI.), S.C. Madressa; now headmaster of Colenso School. Recreation: Angling. Address: Colenso Govt-aided Indian School, Colenso, Natal, S.A. CHETTY, Govindsamy Moothoo, b. Jhb., Aug. 6, 1912; educ. Govt. Coloured Sch. and Tamil Vedic Indian School, Pretoria; employed at J. J. Kirkness, of Pretoria. Public activities: First sec. Pretorians F.C., 1931-32: hon. sec. Tamil Vedic Young Men’s Assocn., 1931-32; hon. record clerk of the P.D.LF.A., 1934; sec. T.LF.A.. 1935; pres. Pretoria Health and Strength Physical Club since 1936; sec, 1934: pres. P.D.I.F.A., 1937-38; hon. sec. Shri Hindu Temple Committee, 1938; pres. Swaraj C.C., 1937-38; pres. S.A.LF.A., 1955-56; visited India at an early age. Address: 227 Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria, Transvaal. CHETTY, Logambal, b. Pmb.; d. of late Ramalingum Chetty; Occ. Social Welfare worker; educ. Indian Girls’ H. Sch., Pmb., Dartnell Crescent, Dbn., Jan Hofmeyer Sch. of Social Wel- fare. Public activities: Social Welfare worker for Pmburg. Indian Child Welfare Soc.; ex-teacher St. Paul’s Ind. Sch. and. Shree Pee Vishnu Sch., Pmb.; oe » sec. Pmb. T.T. Club; tiie mem. School’s T. Club; mem. Deepavali Cheer Soc.; ex record clerk F.O.S.A. (Pietermaritz- burg Area Care Committee); member Ramakrishna Study Circle; first guider of Shree Vishnu School; ex vice-president M.I.T.S.S.; represented National INDIAN WHO’S WHO a7 Council of Women; executive member of Natal Indian Council for Child Welfare; representative of Pietermaritzburg Child Welfare Soc. to standing com. for Non-European Child Welfare in S.A.; Recreation: Table tennis. Address: 550 Church Street, Picter- maritzburg, Phone 22725. CHETTY, Narsamulu Harry, b. Dbn., June 5, 1900; educ. Syden- ham Boys’ Sch.; 4th s. of N. Chetty, Dbn.: m. Murdhamall, e. d. of S. Velloo, Port Elizabeth; left Dbn., stayed in various parts of the Cape — E.L., Queenstown and now res. in Grahamstown; t started own bus. as gen. dlr. in Grahams- town in 1928, with Fu which he is connected. 3 Keen soccer player, x was capt. of Prides LF.C., East London; represented Border at the South African Indian foot- ball tournament held at Port Elizabeth, 1924. Public activities: Member of the Executive of the British Indian Assn., Grahamstown. Address: Business, 17 Spring Street; residence, 1 Trotter Street, Phone 980, Grahamstown, Cape Province. CHETTY, Suthyraju Dhevaraj, merchant; b. Durban, Dec. 1, 1899: e. s. of late Sattiraju Chettiar, a pioneer merchant; ed. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban and Ind. High School, P.M.Burg; m. Manormani, e. d. of the late Mr. and Mrs. N. K. Vather, of Pie- termaritzburg; 5 s., 6 d. (one son and «a daughter med_practi- tioners and a daughter a dental student). On leaving school served first business connec- tions with late R. C. Naidoo, of Umkomaas. In 1928 took over father’s business of tobacconist in Pieter- maritzburg; since converted it into a general ‘dealer’s business and added a branch store. Appointed com. of oaths in 1952. Public activities: Has held and still holds numerous positions of trust in South African Indian social, cultural, educational and political insti- tutions. Address: Bus., 72 Church St., Phone 21365, Tel. Add., “Suthar’, Pietermaritzburg, Natal; Res., 70 Longmarket St., Phone 23397, Pietermaritzburg.

---

## Page 5

58 THE SOUTH AFRICAN CHIBA, Lallabhai, general dealer; b. Kothambi, India, 1918; e.s.0. late C. Jogie; educ. India; m. Valli, d. o. P. Jogie; 5 s., 1 d.; arrived in S.A. 1931; joined father in business; established own business, 1943: trading as L. Chiba General Dealers; visited India 1943. Hon. life vice-president Merchants F.C.; ex-secretary Hindu Soc.; mem. Indian Assn., E.L.; played cricket for E.L. Hindu C.C. Recreation: motor- ing. Address: 99 Fleet Street, Quigney, East London, Phone 5838. CHINNASAMY, Sivalingam, wattle contractor; b. 1917, Howick; s.o. late M. Chinnasamy of Howick; educ. Woodlands and Sastri College; m. Katijah, d.o. G. M. Sirkhott; 3s., 4d.; was assoc. with father’s timber contracting business; took over ownership in 1937; trading as S.A. Timber Contractors; established Progress Trading Co., 1949, and Howick Fruiterers, 1952. Public activities: Was treasurer Howick Indian School Building Fund; was chairman Sarmcol Indian and Coloured Football and Cricket Club; committee member Howick Schools Meals Service; member Howick West Educ. Soc.; chairman Kalavani Orch.; made a donation to the Indian School at Howick. Address: 215a Main Street, Howick, Natal. CHOONILAL, Avkor, nurse and typist; b. Durban, 1935; e.d.o. Jivan Choonilal; educ. Dartnell Crescent Indian Girls’ School; passed J.C. and took up nursing at King George V Hospital; later em- barked on secretarial career; employed as shorthand typist at Bassgo Produce; takes part in local theatricals and social welfare activities of the Indian community. Hobby: Knitting & pen pals. Address: 111 Jan Smuts Highway, Mayville, Durban, Phone 885832. CHOONOO, Rev. Arthur John, Methodist Minister; b. Aug. 31, 1888; s.o.1. John Chinoo (Catech- ist Methodist Church for 43 years); m. d. of Rev. T. Subrahman- yam, of Madras, 1918, died 1920; 1924 m. Ivy Joshua, died 1929; 1931 m. Ruth Abra- hams, of Kimberley; 3s. 2 ds educated High Grade Indian Sch., Dbn.; Wesley Theological Training College, Madras; also studied Theology in Tamil; passed Ist in Final Exam.; returned to Natal, 1914: worked on North Coast 9 years; was accepted candidate for Ministry of Methodist Church of S.A., 1917; passed with Distinction in the Honours Divi- sion in Probation Exams.; ordained 1921; appointed for pastoral work—Durban, 1923; 1925 was trans- ferred to Pietermaritzburg. remained until 1937; was INDIAN WHO’S WHO first “Prime Minister” of Indian Parliamentary Debat- ing Society and chairman Indian Unemployment Relief Comm.; returned to Durban 1938-1954; came back to Pietermaritzburg as Minister-in-charge of Maritzburg Indian Mission. His many public activities include: Executive member Indo-European Joint Council; vice-chairman Indian Technical College In- stitute; hon. chaplain to Indian Scouts Movement. Address: 7 Thomas Street, Pietermaritzburg, Phone 26918. CHOONOO, = Ezekiel John, s. of late John Choonoo, Evangelist; b. Dbn., January 10, 1885; educ. Boys’ Model School, Smith St.. Dbn., and Indian Teachers’ exams. and T.4; m. Florence E. Jackson, 4 children; appointed head teacher of Ind. Boys’ Sch., Tongaat, 1911- 1939. Public activities: Hon. sec. Influenza Relief Comm., 1918; hon. sec. Natal Indian Congress (Tongaat branch); hon. _ sec. Anti-malaria Committee, 1930-1933; hon. secretary Indian Advisory Committee to Tongaat Health Com- mittee; life vice-president and president, 1929-1930, North Coast District Football Assn.; life vice- president and president, 1930-31, Natal Indian Teachers’ Society. Has toured Europe, Canada, Australia, India and East Africa. Address: 25 Leathern Road, Durban. CHOUDREE, Ash- win, Commissioner of Oaths, 1935; b. Dbn., Feb., 18, 1910; educ. Marine College, Dbn. and Natal University College (non-Euro- pean Section), Inter B.A.; o.s. of P. Chou- dree; on leaving sch., joined estate agency business; in 1932 started own business as estate agt.—mang. director of Ashwin Choudree & Co. (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities: Joint sec. Natal In- dian Congress 1935 & 1939; executive member S.A.LC., being the youngest of the Council; delegate to S.A.I.C. Conferences; secretary Durban Hindu Temple; president Non- European University Students’ Association; manager Temple Govt.-aided School. Durban; S.A. Indian delegate to the United Nations; visited India twice. Address: 25 Baker Street, Durban, Phone 28723. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 59 ¥{ THE SOOKRAJ CHOTAL FAMILY ,,)* OF DURBAN CHOTAI, Sookraj, B.A., B.Ed., schoolmaster; b. Clare Estate, Durban, 1912; 2nd s. of late Mr. and Mrs. Chotai, of Clare Estate, Durban; m. Promun, 2nd d. of B. Prumasir of Durban; educ. Hillview Ind. Sch., Carlisle St., Sch., graduated B.A. in 1948, B.Ed. in 1955, obtained Ind. Teachers’ J.C. 1928, T4 in 1932, T3 external 1949. Joined staff of Clairwood Ind. Sch. in 1927; taught at Ladysmith, Pinetown, Depot Rd. Schools; was promoted to principal- ship of Westville Ind. Sch. 1949; qualified to teach Afrikaans. Pub. act.: vice-pres. N.LTS., also exec, mem. since 1942; has represented the soc. in several deputations to Natal Provincial Administration and Natal Education Dept. on educational and salary questions; comm. mem. of Sydenham Branch N.I.T.S.; was treas. of Sydenham Branch 1950-53 and vice-chairman 1954-1955; represented N.I.T.S. on the Oriental Studies Comm. of the Univ. of Natal; was exec. mem. S.R.C. of N.U.C. 1944-46; vice-pres. S.A.H.M.S.; joint hon. sec, Arya Pradtinidhi Sabha S.A. and Hindi Shiksha Sangh; vice- pres. Arya Samaj, Durban; represented S.A.H.M.S. on Hindu religious instruc- tion; delegate A.P.S. to Arya Sarvadeshik Sabha, India; was pres. Young Hindu Cultural Service Soc., Ladysmith; sec. Arya Samaj Ladysmith; pres. Arya Sangat Mundal translated “Religious Awakening in South Africa” and “Aryan Prayer” from Hindi to English; read a paper on “Religious Instruc- tion in Indian schools” to conference of S.A.H.M.S. 1955; represented Hindus at Religious Brains Trust sponsored by Y.M.C.A. 1950; lectured on “Krishna and the Gita” to International Club 1951. Played soccer and _ cricket; was sec. N.I.F.A. 1935; pres. Northern Natal Ind. Lawn Tennis Assoc. and sec. Lady- smith Ind. F.C. Hobby: Gardening. Address: ‘“Padmalaya”, 50 Keal Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Phone 884642. CHOTAI, Proman (Mrs.); wife of S. Chotai d. of B. Purmasir (prop. of Durban Electric Mineral Water Works and S.A. Sweet Manufacturing Co.); educ. Durban Ind. Girls’ High Sch.; 1 s., 2 d. Pub. act.: Comm. mem, Arya Samaj, Durban; was mem. Durban Ind, Women’s Club. Has qualified in dressmaking; studied music (piano); awarded several certificates of the Red Cross Soc. Toured S.A. several times. CHOTAI, Ashalata; e, d. of Mr. and Mrs. S. Chotai; b. Dec. 1, 1943; pupil of Essendene Rd. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch; mem. Girl Guides and S.A. Red Cross Soc. Interested in art and singing. CHOTAT, Satish; o. s. of Mr. and Mrs. S. Chotai; b, May 3, 1949; student Essendene Rd. Govt.- aided Ind. Sch. Keen on sport. CHOTAI, Sadhana; 2nd d. of Mr. and Mrs. S. Chotai; b. March 8, 1953.

---

## Page 6

60 THE SOUTH AFRICAN COOPAN, Dr. Samar- sundarum, B.A., M.A., M.Ed., Ph.D.; Univ. lecturer & student of Scl. Research; b. Sea- view, Dbn., June 2, 1913; s. of M. Coo- pan. Public activities: On staff of Natal University Dept. of Economics, specialis- ing in research on In- dian affairs; while in England studied organisation of Adult Education; lectured in Psychology and Edu- cation at colleges in Madras; chair. Inter- national Film Society, Durban; member Indian Educ. Comm.; regional committee member S.A. Institute of Race Relations; member Governing Committee In- stitute of Social Research of University of Natal. Recreation: Gardening. Club: Durban International Club. Address: 23 Tulip Place, Springfield, Durban. CHRISTIAN, Matthew Aaron, builder; b. Pieter- maritzburg, 1919; s.o. late Jonathan Christian; educ. Higher Grade School, Maritzburg; m. Lillian, d.o. late Staff Sergeant Jimmy Morgas of Durban; was employed by Master Builder; later was employed at Umgeni Water Scheme Augmentation, being the only Indian artisan to lay the Umgeni pipe line. Public activities: Member of the St. Aidan’s Mission Church; member of the Anglican Club; was a member of the Royals F.C., Pietermaritzburg. Recreation: Tennis. Address: 13 Salvia Road, Durban; business, 68 South Coast Road, Durban. : CHRISTOPHER, Albert, Bar.-at-Law; dual practitioner; m. Gadija Gool (Sec. Natal Ind. Child Wel- fare Soc.); played a prominent part in politics since the time of Mahatma Gandhi; one of the founders of the Ind. Tech. Col- lege; has represented Ind. community on numerous deputations both in Union and Overseas; one of the oldest practicing Ind. Attorneys in S.A. Pro- minent in Sporting Circles. Add.: Box 1905, Durban. INDIAN WHO'S WHO CHRISTOPHER, Os- wald James, manager; educ. Fort Hare; m. Visalatchie, née Pil- lay, 2 s.; now retired from business. Public activities: Hon. life pres. of the following: N.LF.A., N.D.LF.A., Uplands I.F.A., New- castle I.F.A.; life trus. Newcastle Tamil Assoc.; pres. of New- castle Ind. Parents’ Soc.; Newcastle Ind. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; Newcastle Ind. Burs- ary Soc.; Newcastle Ind. Child Welfare Society. Recreation: Angling. COOPER, Appasamy Perumal, farmer; b. Malvern, 1909; m. Alimal, 2nd d. of late R. Reddy; 3 s.; fore- man of Addington Hospital for 25 years; later commenced farming at Fairview Farm, specialising in tropical fruit; toured India with his wife. Public act.: Grantee and proprietor of the Cooper Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch.; chairman of the School Meals Service; chairman of the Kranskloof Shri Maha Vishnu Temple, Private Road Board; Indian Farmers’ Assn.; and Kranskloof Indian Cemetery Comm.; treasurer of Motala Lads Hostel, Wyebank; Investigator for the Pinetown Indian Child Welfare Society, in Kranskloof Area; Representative of the Indian Banana Growers for Kranskloof and Wyebank; ex-treasurer and chairman of the Fannin Government- aided Ind. Sch., Wyebank; patron of the Shri Jaya Bharathee Tamil School; treasurer of the Point Young Men’s Society. Recreation: Tennis; Address: Fairview Poultry Farm, New Germany, P.O. Box 131, Pinetown, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN COOPER, Alimal, school teacher; b. Roosfontein, Sept. 4, 1930; d. of late R. Reddy; educ. Roos- fontein Govt.-Aided Indian Sch. and Dur- ban Ind. Girls’ High Sch.; m. A. P. Cooper, s. of late Appasamy, of Roosfontein; 3 s.; commenced _ teaching in 1946 at Dartnell Crescent Ind. Sch.; toured Ind. extensively with her husband, : é after her marriage in mt a Madras in 1949; on return to S.A. was instrumental in establishing the Cooper Government- aided Indian School. Keenly interested in religious study; was acting principal of the school at New Germany. Address: Fairview Farm, New Germany. P.O. Box 131, Pinetown, Natal. COOVADIA, Abdul Haque, company director; b. Surat. In- dia. 1921; s. of late Hajee Mahomed Cas- sim Coovadia; educ. High Grade Sch., Durban; m. Mariam, d. of Ismail Moosa Coovadia, of Jhb.; | s., 2 dd. Business: Estd. bus. in 1940, conducting wholesale and retail bus., trad- ing under the style of E. C. Coovadia & Sons (Pty.), Ltd. and Coronation Outfitters and Tailors (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities: Treasurer Orient Club; member of the International Film Society; member of the Muslim Institute. Recreation: Angling. Clubs: Orient and International. Address: Business, 369 Pine Street, Phone 25430 Durban; residence, 30 Wills Road, Phone 23940 Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 6b DABEEPERSADH, Neerohoo Heeralal; bus owner and farmer; b. Springfield Flats, Durban, on June 6, 1905; 4th s. of late Mr. Meerohoo; educ. Methodist School, Springfield, and Depot Road Govt. School, Durban; m., 3. child- ren. Business: Started bus business in 1924; now have a fleet of buses running between ¢ Verulam & Ndwedwe. if Bought sugar cane . farm in 1939. Public activities: Life patron Nagari Pracharni Sabha (Springfield); life patron Red Rovers F.C. (Mt. Edgecombe); life mem. Springfield Hindu Sabha; mem. Verulam Central Factory Ind. Mill Group; mem. Verulam Burial Ground and Cre- matorium. Recreation: Swimming. Address: Res., 35 Russom Street, Verulam, Natal. DADOO, yY. M, Beck ee er (Edin), L.R.F.P., L.R.F.S. (Glas.); e. s. Haj M. M. Dadoo, of Krugersdorp. Pub- lic activities: Elected pres. of Tvl. Ind. Con- gress 1946; pres. S.A. Ind. Congress 1948; attended first Asian Conference held at New Delhi 1947, to- gether with Dr. Y. M. Naicker; passport con- fiscated by Nationalist 4 Govt. while away to " attend Paris session of United Nations Assembly, 1948, to lobby U.N. members on behalf of S.A.LC.; proceeded without passport to London; served jail sentences totalling 13 months during pas- sive resistance campaign, 1946-48: arrested during defiance campaign, 1952; charged with 19 other leaders and sentenced to 9 months’ hard labour, suspended for three years; banned from attending gatherings and from participating in activities of the Congress and 20 other organisations under the Sup- pression of Communism Act, since 1952. Address: 47 End Street, Johannesburg, Phone 22-6479.

---

## Page 7

62 THE SOUTH AFRICAN DAJEE, Govind Parbhoo, merchant; b. Dungri, Dist. Surat, India, 1928; s. of Parbhoo Dajee; educ. India; m. Mannibhen, d. of Harri Bhika, of Queenstown; 2 s., 1 d.; assoc. with father’s business, later estd. own business. Public act.: Mem. Mochee Maha Sabha; mem. M.S.C. Rec.: Reading. Address: Bus., 268 Hanover Street, Cape Town, Phone 36741; Res., Belgravia Road. Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 63776, DANA, Hirabhai, b. Anand, Gugerat, Ind.. 1908; y. s. of D. Mitha; m. Phullie, d. of P. Toyia, of Balaj Gugerat; educated Anand. Came to S.A. 1918, settled at P.E.; estd. gen. dlrs. bus. 1924, trading as H. Dana; ___ keenly in- terested in all matters affecting the Indian community, particu- larly the Christian section; was member C.1.C.; visited India 1922, 1927, 1945; was accompanied by wife on last trip. Address: 57 Armstrong Street, South End, Port Elizabeth, Phone 23537. DAS, Ramsami Peru- mal, teacher & Hindu Priest; b. Natal, 1894; s. of R. Das, of Madras, India; educ. Durban High Grade Sch.; m. e. d. of R. Martin, of Jhb.; 3 s.. 6 d.; joined Clairwood Sch. Staff 1926; pro- moted prncpl. Ottawa Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch. 1937; prncpl. Luxmi Narayan Govt.-Aided Indian Sch. 1948; on staff of South Coast Madressa Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch.; director & trustee & treas. two Clairwood Cemeteries; president Durban Indian Child Welfare Society, 1938-54; now life trustee, founder INDIAN WHO’S WHO and president Clairwood Indian Social Service Com- mittee, 1933-1946; was congratulated by Earl and Lady Clarendon for his service during the 1935 floods; founder and first Clairwood School Soup Kitchen, 1936; foundation member M. M. Govender Private School and Clairwood Indian Parents Assn.; foundation member and vice-president Clairwood Indian Youth Club; chairman Clairwood Local Com- mittee (Durban Indian Child Welfare Society). Add.: 43 Done Road, Clairwood, Durban. ase Li: DASRUTH, Jeebodh, fruiterer and confec- tioner; b. Verulam, Natal, 1897; s. of Dasruth; m. Man- gerie, d. of G. T. Roopia: 5 s. 2 d.; educ. Dbn. High Sch.; estd. bus. in 1950 at Dundee. Public act.: Pres. Veda Dharama Sabha for five years; keenly interested in the welfare of the Ind. community. Address: P.O. Box 172, Dun- dee, Natal. -- > — DAWOOD, Yusuf, broker and agent; b. Dec. 16, 1925, Dur- ban, Natal; s. of Yusuf; educ. St. Aid- an’s Boys’ School and M. L. Sultan Tech. College, Durban; m., 1 s. Business: Prop. Traders Service Agcy. & mnfrs.’ reprs., rep. Messrs. William Kirsh, malt mnfrs., Potchef- stroom; Union Milk Products, Ltd.; E. S. & A. Robinson S.A. (Pty.), Ltd, Cape Town; Vereeniging Consol. Mills; United Oil & Cake Mills, Mobeni. Durban. Public activities: Holds official posts in religious and social activities. Recreation: Literature, debating and travel. Address: Bus., Phone 27324, 29 Valbro Chambers, Victoria St.; Res., 84 Sparks Rd., Phone 884631, Overport, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN DASS, Murray Jessue, gen. dir.; b. 1902, Madras; s. of late R. N. M. Das; educ. High Grade School, Durban; I s.; after period of private em- ployment estd. own bus. in Oxford St., E.L.; later opened an- other bus. in Queen Street, Cambridge; played soccer for Prides F.C., H.L.V.P. Stars F.C.; visited In- dia 1934, 1938, 1950. Add.: 108 Queen St., Cambridge, E.L., C.P., Phone 88298. DAVE, Anantrai Jaya- shanker, merchant; b Rajkot, | Sawrashtra, India, 2nd Mar., 1914; educ. Accountancy, London Chamber of Commerce, 1937; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Estd. business 1939, general dealers, trading as Dave Bros., opened branch store at Tsho- kuma, trading as Barotta Trading Store (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities: Sec. Zout- pansberg Hindu Seva Samaj; also Sec. Ind. Sch. Committee at Louis Trichardt. Add.: Box 260, Phone 123, Louis Trichardt. DAYA, Khoosal, wholesale merchant; b. Surat, India, in 1906; s. of Khoosal Dajee; educ. Higher Grade Govt. School. Durban; m. Business est. in 1935. Public activities: Trustee, Surat Hindu Assn. Address: Bus., 155 Victoria St.; Res.. 10 Cromer Road, Dur- ban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 63 DAYA, Vanmali; b. Navasari, 1884. Came to South Africa in 1884; settled first in Pretoria and here, in partnership with his brother, opened as a merchant tailor. After brother’s retirement became sole pro- prietor, conducting this business till 1925. In 1929 transferred interests to Johannesburg, with which firm his sons, Motiram Vanmali and Pranjinan Vanmali, are partners. Public work: Chairman, Khatri com- munity in Johannesburg; former treas. Transvaal Indian Tailors’ Employers’ Assn. In India, exec. mem. of the Navasari Khatri Mundal. Address: 49 Betty Street, Jeppe, Phone 22-2890, Johannesburg. DAYARAM, Sewraij, b. 1898, Dbn.; educ. Dbn. Higher Grade Ind. Sch.; m. Saraj- pathi, 4 s., 1 d.; bus. estd. gen. dlr. bus. 1941, trading as S. Dayaram & Co.; also ran a restaurant at 315 Chamberlain Rd.; now storeman _ for Natal Oil Products, Jacobs, Durban. Pub. activities: Chair. Sri Laxminarain Temple 1951; trus. since 1926; patron Budree Place Yuvuk Sabha since 1942. Address: 305 Chamberlain Road, Jacobs, Durban. DEBISING, Dewduth, commercial traveller; b. Dbn., 1928; e. s. o. M. Debising of Durban; educ. Sastri College, matriculated in 1947; m. Dujmani, d.o. Hardewsingh of Clare Estate; | s., 1 d.; employed as a sales representative for Amalgamated Tobacco Co., S.A., Ltd.; after nine years of service, left the firm to join Messrs L. Dreier & Co. (Pty.), Ltd.; repre- senting South African and overseas factories; also an indent agent for overseas factories, Public activities: Interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Recreation: Swimming and out-door sports. Address: 29 Norse Road, Overport, Durban, Phone 888921; business, 41 Cato Street, Durban. DELVI, Ebrahim Yacob, salesman; b. at Salt River, 1920; educ. at Daphil and Bombay; e. s. of late Yacoob Delvi; at the age of 34 years, left for India with father; estd. bus. in Bombay, trading in fancy goods & manu- facturer of jewel boxes. Came to S.A. in 1950 and settled in Maritzburg and later in Cape Town. Rec.: Table tennis. Add.: 29 Fenton Road, Salt River, Cape Town.

---

## Page 8

64 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 65 DELVI, Khatija Ismail, b. Salt River, Cape Town, 1923, d. of late I. Delvi; educ. Cape Town; m. Ah- med H. Allie, of Momka, Ratnagiri, India; on leaving sch. visited India; on re- turn joined father’s bus., trading as M. I. Delvi; now trading as Glenville Cash Store. Public act.: Mem. of Islamic Women’s Lea- gue; member of : Women’s Soc. League; ee /_™ member Muslim Women’s Driving Club; a keen religious worker. Recreation, Cinema, Indian music. Address: Glenville Cash Store, Steen- berg, Cape Town, Phone 85902. DEVA, Parshotam Rayijee, tailor; b. Benoni, Trans- vaal, in 1925; s. of Ravjee Deva; educ. in Johannes- burg; m. Ruxmani, d. of Ravjee Bhana; 2 s. Busi- ness: Known as Sportsman Tailors & Cutters, est. 1945, and Liberty Cinema, Benoni, est. 1949. Treas. Benoni Bantu Lawn Tennis Club. Interested in tennis. Address: 63 3rd St., Cape Section, Benoni, Phone 54-5217. DEVDUTH, Mudan- jeet, teacher and social worker; b. Mayville, 1925; pass T.4, 1942, at the Technical College, Durban; m. Tara- devi, do. B. Sew- nunandan of Plessis- laer, 1 d.; taught at Cato Manor School and several other schools in & around Durban; at present teaching at the Ahmedia Govern- ment-aided School, Mayville. Public acti- vities: Vice - pres. - West Ridge Social Club, Mayville; committee member Child Welfare Society, Mayville; committee member, F.O.S.A., Mayville; records clerk, Arya Samaj, Cato Manor; member of the Natal Indian Blind Society, Mayville; member of the Rate Payers’ Assn., May- ville; social organiser for Indian Seamen; only Indian in Durban granted permission to entertain Indian seamen by the leading shipping companies; has ap- plied for a post of Indian Seamen Welfare officer for Durban. Address: Residence, 115 Standard Road, Mayviile, Phone 884500, Durban. DINATH, Moosa Ahmed, director of companies; b. Devon, Tvl., Jan. 8, 1912; 2nd s. of late A. M. Dinath. Bus.: estd. bus. 1933 at Britz; later transferred to Jhb.; now director of finance companies; was pres. of Tvl. In- dian Congress & also pres. of Muslim Lea- gue. Add.: 71 Com- missioner St., Jhb. DOCRAT, Dawood Mahomed; merchant; b. Hattingspruit, Natal, on April 15, 1907; s. o. Mahomed Docrat; m. o. d. of Dawood Essach, of India; 3 s., 1 d.; educ. Esplanade H. School, Bombay, and Higher Grade Sch., Durban. Prop. Dominion Shirt Manuf. (Pty.), Ltd., & Domitex Clothing Factory, est. in 1937. Started as a salesman in a firm in Field St., Durban, where he acquired business ex- perience. Recreation: Reading. Bus. address: 70 Vic- toria Street; Res. add.: 40 Wills Road, Durban. DOCRAT, Suleman Ahmed, general merchant; b. August 15, 1915, Lachipur, India; 2nd s. of late Ahmed Docrat, formerly of Johannesburg; educ. Johannesburg Indian School; m. Mariam, d.o. M. A. Abed of Johannesburg; 5 s., 5 d.; trader in silken wed- ding fabrics; Public activities: Treasurer Madressa, Lachpur; takes an active part in welfare of the community. Address: Business, 12b 14th St., Page- view, Johannesburg, Phone 355161. DORASAMY, Kistensamy (Tommy Peters), b. in Pietermaritzburg, 1906; e.s.o. late Perumal Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; educ. at Depot Road School, Durban; m. e. d. of late R. V. Naidoo of Kloof; 3 s., 3 d.; after leaving school took up tailoring (Woolf- sons), later served with Durban clothing factory. Pub- lic activities: Executive member of the Garment Workers’ Union of Natal; in 1941, became pres. of this body; resigned this position in 1942 to become the organiser of this Union which has a membership of 9,000; trustee of the Natal Garment Workers F.A.; member of the Coloured-Indian Juvenile Af- fairs Board; also a tennis referee. Address: Residence, 48 Carlisle Street, Flat 4, Durban; business. 77 Albert Street, Durban, Phone 20145, DESAI, Mahomed Moosa, coy. dir; b. Durban, 1919, ¢. s. 0. M. E.- Desai; educ. Port Shep- stone; m, Ameena. c. d. o. Ismail Desai. Bus.: Director of White House (Pty.), Ltd., since 1942; di. City Wholesalers & Furniture Emporium (Pty.), Ltd., prop. Denge Trading Store, Cato Ridge. Public activities: Treas. Port Shep- stone Ind. Child Welfare & Bene- volent Soc.: sec. Young Men’s Muslim Assn, Relief Dept.; pres. Fosa Care Comm.; pres. Port Shepstone & Dist. Ind. C.U.; vice- pres. Port Shepstone & Dist. F.A. Rec,: Tennis, fishing. cricket. Hobby: Aquarium, Address: 38 Reynolds St., P.O. Box 16, Phone 7O: Res.: Albertsville, Port Shep- Stone, Natal. Phone 427. DESAI, Ebrahim Moosa, coy. dir.; b. Port Shenstone. 1930, s. o. M. E. Desai; educ. Port Shepstone & Stanger High Sch.; m. Kathija, d. o. A, M. Desai of Jhb., 1 s. Bus.. Assoc. with father’s bus, City Wholesales (Pty.), Ltd., Port Shep- stone. Rec.: Tennis. Address: City Wholesalers (Pty.), Ltd., Phone 508; Res.: 3 Aiken St., Port Shep- Stone, Phone 450. DESAI, Haj. Moosa Essop, company director; b. Tadkeshewar, Surat, India, 1883; s. of E. E. Desai; m. y. d. of E. Adia, of Durban; 8 s. Bus. activities: Came to S.A. 1896; 1921 estd. bus. in Port Shepstone trading as “The White House”, one of the leading business houses of the South Coast; also prop. S. Coast Builders’ Supplies (Pty.), Ltd. and the Furniture Emporium; prop. Langabellala Store, Port Shepstone. Pub. act.: Chairman Port Shepstone and Dist. Ind. Ratepayers’ Assn.; chairman and trustee Tadkeshwar Soc.; went on Haj 1937 and 1947; visited Pakistan and India 1947. Address: 38 Reynolds St., P.O. Box 16, Phone 70, T.A. “White House”, Port Shepstone, Natal. ~The Hajee Moosa Essop Desai Family = The White House, Port Shepstone : DESAI, Suleman Moosa, coy. dir.; 6. Port Shepstone, 1922; 2nd s. o. M. E. Desai: educ. Port Shepstone & Muslim High Sch., Panchgani, Bombay; m. Halima, d. o. C. M. Desai, Stanger. 3 d. Bus.: Joinec father’s bus. 1942; dir. of White House (Pty.), Ltd., City Whole- salers (Pty.), Ltd. and Furniture Emporium (Pty.), Ltd. Public act.: Was sec. of Debating Soc. at Panchgani & chair. of Schools’ Baitul-Mal; was capt. of the hockey team: was organiser and 1st sec. of Young Men's Muslim Assn.; was its rep. on South Coast Assn. at Rossburgh; was on the organising comm. to celebrate Independence of Pakistan; was foundation mem. Natal Ind. Organisation; trus, M. E, Desai Ed. Trust: visited Paki- stan 1948; attended all Pakistan Muslim Youth Conventions; also attended mectings held at the home of Miss F. Jinnah who was pres.: has made contact with Muslim Youth Organisation throughout the world. Plays cricket and tennis. DESAI, Yusuf Moosa, coy. dir.: b. Port Shepstone, 1937, s. o. M. E. Desai; educ, Port Shepstone Sch. Bus.: Is assoc. with father’s bus. at Port Shepstone: managers the Grocery Dept. of White House (Pty.). Ltd., Port Shepstone. Rec.: Cricket.

---

## Page 9

66 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO DR. N. P. DESAI FAMILY DESAI, Nagindas Purshottamdas, medical prac- titioner, L.M.S.S.A. (London), L.R.F.P. & S. (Glas.), L.M. (Rotunda, Dublin); b. Tongaat, Natal, Jan. 31, 1905; s. of Shri Purshottamdas Girdhardas Desai; relative of the late Mahatma Gandhi, who was closely associated with Gandhi at Phoenix; m. Bhadrakumari, d. of Dr. Madanji Jethabhai, of State Medical Services, Rajkot, 1928; 1 s., 2 d.; educ. Wes- leyan Sch., Tongaat; 1916 entered Esplanade High Sch., Bombay; 1921 was a student at National High Sch., matriculated in 1923, entered National Medical College, graduating in medicine in 1929; was in pvte. practice in Bombay, later joined the Govt. depart- mental med. service under the famous Dr. Rufus C. Thomas, chief M.O. in Jamnagar, who was renowned for his reforms in State Hospital services, returned to S.A. in 1936 en route for further medical studies in England and studied at the Universities of London, Glasgow and Dublin, obtaining L.R.F.P. & S. and L.M.S.S.A., and L.M. (Dublin); returned to S.A. in 1940. Pub. act.: Whilst in India participated in the Independence struggle; edited the “Maha Gujarat” (a cultural and religious magazine), also edited the journal “Hindu” for several years; one of the founders of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj, a society for the advancement of Gujarati culture; also one of the founders of the Gujarati Cultural Society, edited souvenir brochure published by the Kathiawad Seva Samaj to record the history and educational accomplishment of that community; pres. of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samai, Gujarati Cultural Society; S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; was chairman of the Council of the S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; was pres. of the Indian Goodwill Club and vice-pres. N.ILC.; trustee of the Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust and trustee of the Varman Trust; Commis- sioner for Hindi examination, Durban centre; repst., Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samati of Wardha, India; Trustee of the Hindi Shiksha Sangh; Grantee of Kathiawad Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Durban; Grantee Candella Hindu Sungatan Govt.-aided Ind. Girls’ Sch.; Council mem. M. L. Sultan Technical College; compiler of common prayer for Hindus; foundation mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; Kathiawad Indian High Sch.; Manilal Valjee Govt.- . aided Ind. Sch.; Kathiawad Hindu Gujerati Sch.; Mahatma Gandhi Hall; Kathiawad Hindu Library; Saurashtra Recreational Centre; Kathiawad Hindu Mahila Samaj and the Gandhi-Desai Memorial Hall. Address: Surgery, 88b Victoria St., Durban; Res., 81 Ninth Ave., Durban. DESAI, Bhadrakumari; d. of Dr. Madanji J. Adalja, of State Medical Services, Rajkot; b. Feb, 20, 1910, Rajkot, Saurashtra, India; m. Dr. N. P. Desai; 1 s., 2 d.; educ. Girls’ Primary Sch. and Alfred High Sch., Rajkot. Pub. act.: Associated with her husband in his public work; was hon. teacher and headmistress for four years of the Gujerati School (Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj); played an important role in the establishment of the Mahila Samaj and success- fully organised functions held under its auspices; popularised “Garba” in its original form; was pre- sented with an Address by the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj and the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha for her valuable service; mem. of the Durban Indian Women’s Assn.; comm. mem. of the Gujerati Cultural Soc. Address: “Shantiniketan”, 81 9th Ave., Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 67 DR. N. P. DESAI FAMILY continued. DESAI, Manocharlal Nagindas, M.B., B.S., med. pract., b. Rajkot, Saurashtra, Oct. 28, 1929; s. of Dr. N. P. Desai; m. Vanlila (Vina), now studying at Calcutta Univ.(for B.A.), d. of Sri Amritlal V. Sheth, stockbroker, of Calcutta; educ. Rajkot Hindu Tamil Institute and St. Anthony’s Sch. (Durban), Children’s Academy, Bombay. After matriculating in 1947, proceeded to Siddharth College, Bombay, for pre-medical science course; obtained the Inter Science Certificate (Bombay); proceeded to the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Medical College, Indore, and graduated, M.B., B.S., 1957. Worked in England as a House ! Surgeon in All Saints’ Hospital, Chatham (Kent), and Stockport Infirmary, and as a House Physician at the Stepping Hill Hospital at Stockport (Cheshire). At present in the United States of America occupying the position of a Resident Medical Officer in Ellis Hosptal, Schenectady, New York. Rec.: Music, tennis and table tennis. DALAL, Tarangini, B.A. (Hons.); d. of Dr, N. P. Desai; b. Sept. 16, 1931, Rajkot, Saurashtra; m. Arvindkumar H. Dalal, B-.Com., C.A. (chartered pene i oma 1952; educ. aj ot ris ission Sch.; St. An- ban; Children’s Academy, Bo c thony’s (Durban); Children’s Academy matriculated and Ae Wil a. (Bombay); matriculated in 1948; le graduated Wilson College, Bombay, . lege, Bombay, and graduated B.A. in 1952. B . = . 1959. Dr. N. P. Desai; b. Rajkot, Saurash- | tra, India; educ. Irish Mission School, | DESAI, Sarojini, B.A. (Hons.); d. of | Rajkot; St. Anthony’s School, Dur-

---

## Page 10

68 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO q P. G. Desai Family (Gandhi and Company) THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 69 > P. G. DESAI FAMILY & (Gandhi and Company) DESAI, Vithaldas, DESAI, Varjivandas Purshottamdas; e. s. Purshottamdas; 2nd s. of Sri Purshottamdas | Girdhardas Desai; b. as ped “ Bombay, Jan. 1, 1895; educ. at Esplanade High Sch., Bombay, and St. Xavier’s Col- lege, Bombay; qualified for intermediate Arts, Bom- bay University. Bus.: Senior partner of Pitamber & Co., Bombay, doing business as freight, chartering and coal brokers; since 1924 the company has been appointed as the sole freight brokers to the Scindia Steam Navigation Co., Ltd., at Bombay. Pub. act.: Was sec. of the Bombay Suburban Congress Comm.; was delegate to annual session of the Ind. Nat. Con- gress at Gaya; pres. of Vile Parle Congress Comm.; served imprisonment during the non-co-operation movement; well versed in Gujarati, Sanscrit and Eng- lish. DESAI, Krishnadas Purshottamdas; s. of Sri P. G. Desai; b. Phoenix, Natal, March 12, 1910; m. Kusum, 1934; d. of Sri Prabhubas G. Shah of Calcutta; educ. Tongaat Indian Sch., National Primary Sch., Bombay, and Bhavsinghji High Sch., Porbandar, India. Bus.: Merchant and director of companies; director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; P. G. Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner of Orient’s Spice Products, and Desai Investment Com- pany. Pub. act.: Was vice-pres. of Tongaat T.C.; was joint sec. of the N.I.C. Tongaat Branch; was chairman of the Indian Study Group, Tongaat; mem. of the Tongaat Town Board; comm, mem. of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; visited India in 1921, 1933, 1946 and 1955. Address: P.O. Box 27, Tongaat, Natal. OV of Sri P. G. Desai; b. Porbandar Saurashtra, Jan. 9, 1903; m. Heeralakshmi, d. of late Sri Ramji G. Kothari of Jodia, i India, in 1924; 2 s.; educ. Porbandar and Wesleyan Ind. Sch., Tongaat. Bus.: Arrived in S.A. in 1904, lived with Mahatma Gandhi in Phoenix; in 1912 at Tolstoy Farm, Tv!.; managing director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; managing director of Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner Orient’s Spice Products and Desai Investment Co. Pub. act.: Was sec. and trustee of Vishwaroop Temple and Dharamshala; was sec. of Tongaat Hindu Crema- torium Society; was chairman and trustee of Tongaat Ind. Sch. Comm. and Grantee of Sch. conducted by school trust board; was the chairman of the N.I.C. (Tongaat Branch); mem. of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; treas. for the past 10 years. Address: 114-116 Victoria St., Durban, DESAI, Shantilal Purshottamdas; 5th s. of Sri P. G. Desai; b. Tongaat, Natal, April 13, 1917; m. Mrudula, 1941, d. of late Sri Maneklal M. Kothari (relative of Mahatma Gandhi) and Revenue Officer of Saurashtra; 5 d., 1 s.; educ, Tongaat, Natal, National Primary Sch. Bombay, Bhavsinghji High Sch. and Alfred High Sch., Rajkot. Bus.: Merchant and director of com- panies; director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban & Tongaat; also P. G. Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner of Orient’s Spice Products and Desai Investment Co. Pub. act.: Mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj and Gujarati Cultural Society, Durban; was sec, and treas. of S. A. Vanik Asso- ciation; visited India in 1931, 1941, 1946 and 1956. Address: P.O. Box 27, Ton- gaat, Natal. DESAI, Kantilal Pur- shottamdas; s. of Sri P. G. Desai; b. Ton- gaat, May 18, 1919; m. Bhanumati d. of Sri Kalidas Dayal, of Porbandar, India, in 1944; 3 d., 2 s.; educ. Taluka Sch., Porbandar, and Tongaat Ind. Sch. Bus.: Director of companies and merchant; director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; director of P. G. Desai & Co., Durban; partner in Orient Spice Products and Desai’s Investments Com- pany. Pub. act.: Was executive mem. of the N.LC. Durban; comm. mem. of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj (Natal); mem. of the Gujarati Cultural Soc.; sec. of the Umgeni Crematorium Soc.; was sec. of the Durban Ind. Retailers’ Assoc. Visited India in 1921, 1944 and 1949. Address: 114-116 Victoria St., Durban, DESAI, Rameshchandra Purshottamdas; s. of late Sri P. G. Desai; b. Vile Parle, Bombay, Feb. 11, 1923; m. Hansa, 1948; d. of Sri Amritlal R. Kothari; educ. Tongaat Ind. Sch. and St. Anthony Sch., Dur- ban. Bus.: Director of Gandhi & Co, (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; director of P. G. Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner of Orient’s Spice Pro- ducts, and Desai Investment Company. Pub. act.: Mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Youth Orgsn. Visited India in 1947 and 1952. Add.: 114- 116 Victoria St. Durban. DESAI, Manilal Pur- shottamdas; s. of late Sri P. G. Desai; b. Tongaat, Feb. 6, 1921; m. Indumati, 1946, d. of late Sri Maganlal K. Parekh of Bombay; 2 d., 3 s.; educ. Taluka Sch., Porbandar, Tongaat Ind. Sch, and St. Anthony’s Sch., Durban. Bus.: Director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; director of Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner of Orient Spice Products and Desai Investment Co. Pub. act.: Mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; mem. of Gujarati Cultural Society, Kathiawad Hindu Youth Organisation. Visited India 1921, 1945 and 1951. Address: 114-116 Victoria St., Durban. DESAI, Pravinchandra Purshottamdas; s, of late Sri P. G. Desai; b. Porbandar, Saurashtra, Nov, 1, 1927; m. Sarla, 1958; d. of late Sri Nathalal, Raghavjee Rugnath of Verulam; educ. Tongaat Ind. Sch., and private studies. Bus.: Director of Gandhi & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Durban and Tongaat; director of Desai & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban; partner of Orient’s Spice Products, and Desai Investment Co. Pub. act.: Mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj, and Kathiawad Hindu Youth Organisation. Visited India in 1953. Address: 114-116 Vic- toria St., Durban.

---

## Page 11

THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 71 2 The Dhupelia Family of Durban © DHUPELIA, Harjiwan Hansraj (late), general merchant; b. Kathiawad, India, 1884, died Feb. 13, 1947; 3 s., 1 d.; educ. at Alfred High Sch., Rajkot, India, and came to this country in 1905. Was employed by Ebrahim Suleman Doba of Verulam, thereafter estd. bus. in Bellair in partnership with Shivlal Dharsi; was employed by the East India Trading Company as bookkeeper (1912). Visited India in 1915, returning in 1916. In 1919 estd. business in partner- ship with K. Haribhai at 106 Victoria St., Durban; in 1924 traded as Dhupelia & Son. Pub. act.: Sec. to Kathiawad Arya Mundal; was comm, mem. of N.I. Congress; when the appeal for the Tilak Swaraj Fund was launched, took active part in raising funds. In 1932 estd. real estate bus.; 1938 founded Dhupelias Properties (Pty.), Ltd., and several buildings were erected under his personal supervision. He also established the Dhupelia Charitable Trust. 70 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO P. G. DESAI FAMILY (Gandhi and Company) DHUPELIA, Pranlal Harjiwan, director of companies; e, s. of late Harjiwan Hansraj Dhupelia; b. Rajkot, India, in 1904; 3 s., 3 dj educ. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Durban. Was admitted as partner in father’s business, Dhupelia & Son, in 1924; became managing director of the firm in June, 1931. Has shown outstanding ability in developing this concern of importers and exporters and as general merchant; also director of Dhupelia Properties (Pty.), Ltd., Universal Holdings (Pty.), Ltd., Alpha Theatres (Pty.), Ltd. Pub. act.: Was a prominent mem. of Natal Ind. Assoc. and now of N.I. Con- gress ; trust. Kathiawad Hindu Siva Samaj and Dhupelia Charitable Trust. Address: Dhupson House, 61-63 Prince Edward St., Phone (bus.) 66331 (res.) 67460, Tel. Add.: “Dhupson”, Durban, Natal. DHUPELIA, Himatlal Harjivan, director of companies; 2nd s. of late Harjivan Hansraj Dhupelia; b, Durban, Aug. 23, 1919; m. Jaya, d. of Chhaganlal Zaver- chand of Rajkot, India; 2 s. 4 d.; educ. Carlisle St. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Sastri College, Marine College, Durban, and Alfred High Sch., Rajkot, India. Joined the firm of Dhupelia & Son in Jan. 25, 1952, at Durban. Relative of Mahatma Gandhi. Educ. Bombay University. Came to Natal 1904. Contributed to “Indian Opinion’; was Editor of Gujerati section. Courted imprisonment during Mahatma Gandhi Passive Resistance Cam- paign. Was Pres. of Bombay Presidency Assoc., Kathiawad Arya Mandal and S.A. Vanik Assoc.; Patron Kathiawad Seva Samaj. Author of “Gita” and “Mahatma Gandhi”. In recognition of his work was asked by Indian Community to unfurl flag of free India and address the gathering on First Independence Day. GANDHI, Abhechand Annritlal, b. Porbander, Nov. 8, 1870; died Nov. 12. 1955. Was nephew of Mahatma Gandhi. Came to Natal 1896. Benefactions include substantial donations to Vishwaroop Temple, Tongaat High School and Sastri College. Profoundly religious. Founder of firm Gandhi & Co. (Pty.) Ltd., Tongaat and Durban. DESAI, Purshothamdas Girdhardas, b. June 23, 1874, Porbander; died 1934 and when the bus. was converted into a limited liability company in 1945, he became managing director, a position he still occupies; also director of Dhupelia’s Properties (Pty.), Ltd., Universal Holdings (Pty.), Ltd., Alpha Theatres (Pty.), Ltd. Pub. act.: First sec. (a post he still occupies) of the Kathiawad Hindu Samaj; Council mem. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; trustee M. L. Sultan Charitable and Educational Trust; mem. M. L. Sultan Technical College Council; trustee Indian Medical Services Trust (Durban); mem. Management Board of St. Aidan’s Mission Hospital; mem. Ramakrishna Centre of S.A, Trust., Dhupelia Charitable Trust; was treas. of Indo-Pakistan Flood Relief Comm. Takes keen interest in tennis. As pres. of Durban Central Indian Lawn Tennis Club, played active part in organising first championship tournaments for women and resulted in number of women tennis players being increased. Visited India several times and met leading personalities among them Mahatma Gandhi, Pundit Nehru, Vijayalaxmi Pundit, late H.H. Aga Khan and Begum Aga Khan; also visited Egypt, Kenya, Uganda and Tanganyika. Rec.: Tennis, bridge. Address: Dhupson House, 61-63 Prince Edward St., P.O. Box 325, Phone (bus.) 66331 (res.) 24121, Tel. Add.: “Dhupson”, Durban, Natal. DHUPELIA, Avnikant Pranlal, merchant; e. s. of Pranlal Harjiman Dhupelia; b. Durban, Aug. 26, 1929; m. Piyuhala, d. of Chunilal K. Sayta, of Bombay; educ. St. Anthony’s Government-aided Indian School and Sastri College, Durban. After leaving college was admitted as partner in father’s bus., Dhupelia & Son (Pty.), Ltd. Is a member of Durban Central Indian Lawn Tennis Club.

---

## Page 12

72 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO DEVNARAYAN DOORGHA FAMILY DOORGHA, Devnarayan; general merchant; b. Durban, Nov. 20, 1905; e. s. of late Mr. Doorgha of Durban; m. Dowlathia, d. of Mr. Rupee of Umbogintwini; 4 s., 4 d. educ. Cato K Manor Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; estd. general dealer’s business in 1934 at 152 Sirdar Rd., Clairwood, Natal. Pub. act.: Trustee, Yuvuk Arya Samaj (Clairwood) and holds official positions in many sporting and public bodies. Visited India and Pakistan in 1950. Address: 101 Cherry Rd., Clairwood, Natal, Phone 818763. DOORGHA, Shrikissoon; b. Clairwood, March 1, 1927; e. s. of Mr. and Mrs. D. Doorgha of Clairwood; m. Dasmathy, d. of Sewgulam Lalla of Estcourt; 1 s., 2 d.; educ. Sastri College and University of Cape Town. Estd. Coastal Dry Cleaners in 1952 at 544 South Coast Rd., Clairwood. Takes keen interest in many branches of community life. Rec.: Tennis and fishing. Address: Res., 101 Cherry Rd., Clairwood, Natal, Phone 818763; bus., 544 South Coast Rd., Clairwood, Phone 818732. DOORGHA, Brijlal; b. Clairwood, July 2, 1932; 2nd s. of Mr. and Mrs. D. Doorgha of Clairwood; m. Dewmathee, d. of V. Panday, of Raisethorpe, Maritzburg; educ. College. Manager of Coastal Dry Cleaners at 544 South Coast Rd., Clairwood, since 1952. Pub. act.: Takes keen interest in community life. Address: Bus., 544 South Coast Rd., Clairwood, Phone 818732; Res., 101 Cherry Rd., Clair- wood, Natal, Phone 818763. DOORGHA, Mathen; b. Clairwood, Aug. 10, 1937; y. s. of Mr. and Mrs. D. Doorgha of Clairwood; educ. at Clairwood Senior Boys’ Sch, and Sastri College; now studying medicine in England. Keen sportsman. DOORGHA, Sunderlal; bookkeeper; b. Clairwood, July 10, 1935; 3rd s. of Mr. and Mrs. D. Doorgha of Clairwood; educ. Clairwood Senior Boys’ in father’s general dealer business at 152 Sirdar Rd., Clairwood. Keen sportsman. Ul THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO DOOKRAN, Rajnu- nan, sch. principal; b. Pietermaritzburg, Oct. 15, 1900; educ. Esther Payne Raily Ind. Sch.; m., 3 children. Passed Indian Teachers’ Cert. Exam.; Junior, 1912; Senior, 1914; and T.4 1934. Began teaching at St. Silas’ Govt.- Aided Ind. School, Sutherlands, Aug. 9, 1912; Railway School as headmaster 1916. Public activities: Pres. Mids. Ind. Schs. F.A.; treasurer Maritzburg County Assn.; dele- 73 ELLARY, George, broker and agent; b. 25th Oct., 1920, Dbn., s. o. Arumugam Pillay; m. Monor Thygan, 3 d. Bus: Prop. of Fresh Pro- duce & Refreshment Room, Public act.: First pres. Cambrian F.C.; pres. Dann- hauser United Club for 10 yrs, now H.L.V.P.; sec. of Mis- conduct Brd. North- ern Natal Ind. F.A.; was pres., selector & convenor; rep. N. Ntl. on exec, South Coast gate to N.ILF.A.; mem. of S.P.C.A.; pres. M.LF.A.; joint sec. Indo-European Joint Council; pres. M. and D. Ind. Boy Scouts Assn.; vice-pres. I.Y.M.A.; sec. Plessislaer Water Scheme; auditor N.I.T.S. (Pieter- maritzburg branch); rep. Non-European Land Owners Assn. to the authorities; Ind. mem. Social Services of S.A. (Pietermaritzburg branch); Ind. mem. Local Health Com. Adv. Brd.; ch. Pmb. Ind. Child Welfare Soc. (for 8 yrs.); trustee N.I.T.S. Sch. Bldg. Trust; vice-pres. Aryan Benevolent Home (Pieter- maritzburg branch); Assistant Div. Com. of Natal Ind. Boy Scouts Assn. Was presented to the Royal Family in 1947. Sports: Rep. Maritzburg in inter- town matches, 1927; played cricket, M.I.C.C.; mem. Plessislaer T.C. Visited Transvaal and P.E.A. 1934; pres. N.IL.F.A. 1952; hon. life vice-pres. N.I.F.A. elected in 1953. Address: Res., P.O. Plessislaer, Natal; Bus., E. Payne Smith School, Pietermaritz- burg, Nazal. EBRAHIM, Abduila, merchant; b. Feb. 11, 1911, in Borlie, dist. Kolaba, Bombay; e. s. of Abdulla Allie; educ. Borlie and Cape Town. Came to S.A. in 1925; was assoc. with father’s bus.; later est. own business; pub. act. mem. of Janjira Educ. Soc. of Cape Town, mem. of Young Kokney Muslim Soc., mem. of Hospital Welfare Soc.; visited India several times; takes keen interest in affairs of Indian community. Address: Bus. and Res., 23 Mountain Rd., Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 52337. ELLIMDEEN, Akbar Hoosen, wholesale fruit mer- chant; b. Boksburg Dist., Tvl. 1915: educ. Islamic Madressa Benoni; joined his brother in business as partner, trading as “R. Ellimdeen Wholesale Fruit Merchant”. Public activities: Played for Thistle F.C., Berea Park F.C. Benoni, Pretorians F.C.; treasurer Berea Park F.C. 1935-43; treasurer Pretorians F.C. 1944-45; treasurer N.T.E.C.U. 1944-45; founder Kamal Cricket Club; secretary and treasurer Kamal C.C. 1943-45; vice-pres. Pretoria and District Muslim Council; comm. mem. Pretoria Islamic Society; rep. N.T.I.C.U. on the Pretoria Sports Board. Address: Bus., Stall No. 7 Market, Pretoria; Res., 110 2nd St., Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Ind. F.A.; first sec. Uplands I.F.A.; now trus.; Coun- cillor I.F.A. and selector; sec. N.I.F.A., 1956: mem. N.D.LF.A. Comm. to discuss Glencoe D.I.F.A. amalgamation, now pres. N.D.LF.A.; vice-pres. N.D.I. Referees’ Assn.; pres. Dannhauser Sports Ground Assn.; H.L.V.P. Dannhauser Ind. C.C.; also vice-pres., selector & mem. of Misconduct Board; pres. Dannhauser Ex-Students’ Club; sec. Ind, Sch. Management Board; sec. Ind. Child Welfare Soc.: founder of Dannhauser Branch Ramakrishna Centre. Rec.: Motoring. Address: Main St., P.O. Box 31 Phone 44, Dannhauser. > ERNEST, Willie, 2nd s. of David Ernest; b. Johannes- burg, Nov. 4, 1891; educ. Higher Grade Government School and St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham, Durban. After school became a teacher at St. Aidan’s School; in 1910 returned to Johannesburg and was in clerical employment; in 1919 joined the Civil Service, becom- ing postal clerk at Johannesburg Non-European Post Office. Public activities: Has been an active sportsman, playing soccer both in inter-district and inter-provin- cial matches; rep. Transvaal from 1913-28, being twice captain; manager of the Transvaal team at Kimberley 1930; pres. of the Transvaal Indian F.A. for 10 years; treas. of the S.A.LF.A. 1928, declined the presidentship of the S.A.I.F.A. 1928; founder of the Transvaal Coloured Football Assoen.; life pres. of the T.C.F.A., was three years vice-pres. of the T.C.C.U.; was vice-pres. and trustee of the Rangers Lawn Tennis Club; mem. of the S.A.I.F.A. Selection Comm. during the All-India Soccer tour of 1934; mem. of the International Club; one of the founders of the Transvaal Colonial-Born Indian Assoc.; has taken part in practically every movement affecting the Indian community, social and general. Postmaster: at the Clairwood Indian Post Office, Durban.

---

## Page 13

74 THE SOUTH AFRICAN ee INDIAN WHO’S WHO it THE A. E. ENGAR FAMILY ENGAR, Gulam Mahomed, baker and merchant; s. of Mr. and Mrs. Ismail Essop Engar; b. Port Shepstone, Nov. 13, 1925; m. Zorina, d. of Ismail Moosa, of Durban; 2 s., 1 d.; educ. Port Shepstone Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., matriculated at Sastri College in 1945. Was partner in mother’s business. After her death in 1954, was joined by his brother as partner, later estd. Port Shepstone Manufacturing Co, and the Port Shepstone Trading Store. Pub. act.: Trustee, Engar Education Trust; asst. sec. Port Shepstone Child Welfare Society; com. mem. Santa (South Coast Branch); treas. Port Shepstone Football and Cricket Union; com. mem. Port Shepstone School Meals Service. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 44 Reynolds St., Port Shepstone, Natal, Box 54, Phone 202; Res.: 56 Bazley St., Port Shepstone, Phone 393. ENGAR, Amodjee Ebrahim, general merchant; s. of Ebrahim Mamoojee Engar; b. Todkeshwar, India, 1876, died Durban in Dec., 1932; 2 d. Came to Natal in 1886, was first employed as salesman at Isipingo; in 1906 estd. first Indian store, trading as Port Shepstone Trading Co.; estd. bakery in 1921; foundation member and trustee, Port Shepstone Mosque and Madressa; foundation mem. of Port Shepstone Educational Soc., which created first Eng- lish-medium school in the district; in 1927 opened store at Paddock and was a foundation mem. of Paddock Madressa Trust. A generous donor to chari- ties and created the Engar Education Trust. Went on pilgrimage with his wife in 1920. ye ENGAR, Rassool Amodjee, d. of late Amodjee Ebrahim Engar; b. Todkeshwar, India, 1900; came to S.A. in 1906; m. Ismail Essop Engar, of Port Shepstone; 2 s., 5 d. Traded at Paddock 1932 and was large property-owner at Port Shepstone; bequeathed £2,500 for a primary English school at Marburg; bequeathed £500 for deserving persons for pilgrimage to Mecca. Died Jan., 1954. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO B GABRIEL, Rev. Father Leo, A.C., O.M.L; b. Durban 1910; educ. St. Pat- rick’s College, Jaffna, Ceylon and Domi- nican University “Angelico”, Rome, Italy; Parish Priest St. Anthony’s Ind. & Coloured Congrega- tion, Pmburg. for past 25 years; founder of Our Lady of “Good Health” of Velanganni at Raise- thorpe, Pmburg; founder St. Anthony’s Parish Centre, Marian Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch. for Boys, Recreation Club Hall and Oratory 1956. Address: St. Anthony’s Catholic Presbytery, Loop Street, Pmburg, S.A., Phone 25307. —+— GABRIEL, Dr Michael Stephen Lazarus, B.Sc., M.B. Ch.B. (Rand); b. Durban, Nov. 19, 1918; y. s. of late Mr. and Mrs. Bryan Gabriel of Durban, Roman Catholic; educ. St. Anthony’s Govt.-aided Indian “= Sch., Carlisle Street; matriculated Sastri ‘ ee College 1936; first 53 ———— Indian to obtain i B.Sc. (Union of S.A.) rarets at Fort Hare Univ. : College 1939; com- pleted Diploma in Educ. 1940; while at Fort Hare took part in several dramatic and light opera productions; was assistant school master at Stanger Government and Greyville Government schools in [940; commenced medical studies at University of Witwatersrand in 1941; graduated M.B., Ch.B. in 1945; was house surgeon- physician to Lovedale Hospital in 1946; commenced general practice at Port Shepstone in 1947, where he now resides; m. Dr. Matilda Prema Royeppen, e. d.o. Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Royeppen in 1954. Vice-pres. Port Shepstone Indian Child Welfare and Benevolent Society; past chairman F.O.S.A. Port Shepstone area Care Committee: hon. physician to Port Shepstone Indian Child Welfare and Benevolent Society and FOSA Care Committee; active member Roman Catholic Church, Interests: Music. Address: Business, Revnold Street, Port Shepstone, Phone 197; residence, 44 Price Street, Phone 133. > GABRIEL, Dr. Matilda (née Royep- pen), M.B., Ch.B. (Rand); b. Durban, April 17, 1923; e.d.o. Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Royeppen of Durban; m. of Methodist Church; educ. Cen- tenary Road Govt.- ~ aided Indian School and Indian Girls’ High School where matriculated in 1940, was house captain In- dian Girls’ High School; graduated M.B., Ch.B., at Uni- versity of Witwaters~ rand in 1947; was house physician-surgeon to Mc- Cord Hospital, Durban, in 1948; commenced general practice in Durban in 1949; m. Dr. Michael Gabriel of Port Shepstone in 1954, where now in joint medical practice; was active member and leader of Lorne Street Methodist Church, Durban, and now active member of Port Shepstone Methodist Church; committee member Port Shepstone Indian Child Welfare and Benevolent Society. Interests: Gardening and music. GAJOO, Lall Rampersadh, secretary; b. Wesselsnek, 1915; 5th s. of late Gajoo of Wesselsnek; 1 s., 2 d.; educ. Fort Hare, Cape; secretary in the employ of a transport company; served in World War II; saw service in the Abyssinian, East African and Middle East campaigns; was truck driver, clerk, despacth rider, paymaster and attained rank of Staff/Sergeant; returned to the transport company after being de- mobbed; has sound knowledge of transportation matters, management, maintenance and operation of large transport companies. Recreation: Angling. Address: Hoosens Bidg., 116d Queen St., Durban. GANGARAM, Kanti- Jal, M.Ch.S.; chiropo- dist; 2nd son of late Mr. Gangaram Daya; m. e. d. of Trikamdas Rugnath, of Johan- nesburg; educ. St. Anthony’s School and Sastri College, Dur- ban, and Manchester Foot Hospital, Lanca- shire, England (com- pleted Diploma in Chiropody). Recrea- tion: Winner of Fed- ind Table Tennis Champ. 1949; Inter- Club Annual T. Ten- nis Tournament 1949. nis Tournament 1949- 50; Br. Council House Mixed D. Tournament, 1949. Interested in Tennis and Chess. Address: Surgery, first floor. 44 Queen St., Phone 21284; Res., 91 Devon Terrace, Phone 854117, Westville, Durban.

---

