# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt7
**Total Pages:** 19

---

## Page 1

162 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO OMAR, Hajee Fatima Essack, gen. dir, b. 1932 Cape Town, e. d. of E. Omar of Ankleswar. Surat; educ. Chapel St. Sch. and Zonne- bloem College, C.T. Bus.: Est. bus., trad- ing as Woodstock Supply Store. Public activities: Was mem. of Wisteria Tennis Club; assoc. with Muslim Women’s Activities in C.T.; visited Mecca and toured Saudi Arabia 1954. Interests: Dress- making. Address: 20 Page St., Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 51207. OMAR, Shaik, decorator & plastic painter; b. Overport, Durban, s. of Imam Shaik Osman. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in reli- gious and social matters; devotes most of his time to artistic work, pertaining to interior decoration. Rec.: Angling. Add.: 21 Llandaff Rd., May- ville, Dbn. PADAYACHEE, Janakie, housewife; b. 1908, Kimberley; d. of S. M. Padayachee; educ. Prescod Sch.; m. late C. S. Paday- achee, e. s. o. late Kandasamy Padaya- chee; 4 s., 2 d.; estd. bus. in 1918, trading as general dealer and fruiterer; now trading as Durban Fruit Merchant. Pub. act.: Was vice-pres. Indian Women’s Assn.; mem. Col. Women’s Ccl.; a popular hostess and keeps “open house”; visitors from all parts of the Union; has travelled extensively in S.A. Address: Bus., 63 Queen St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 24416; Res., 19 Bullen St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 23661. PADAYACHEE, Jack (Tommy), b. East London, 1908; s. of P. Padayachee; educ. East London; y. d. of Isden Izally, of King Wms. Town; 2 s., 2 d. Assoc. with father’s bus., later transferred to Cape Town and estd. All-India Social Club; snooker champion, played against Joe Davis; mem. of Grenadier F.C.; played in the Sam China Cup tourney in 1937, and rugby for Swaraj team in East London. Address: Bus., 98 Darling St., Cape Town, Phone 33380; Res., 73 Sir Lowry Rd., Cape Town. PADAYACHEE, Thomas, general dealer; b. Kim- berly, 1913; s. of Soopramanian Padayachee; educ. William Pescod School, Kimberley. Bus.: Trading as Charlie's Cafe. Address: 52a Main Rd., Beaconsfield, Kimberley. PADAYACHI, Nar- ansamy Poopenthren, B.A., B.Ed.; super- visor Natal Ind. Schs.; b. April 21, 1914, Dbn.; e. s. o. V. N. Padayachi; educ. York Rd. Ind. High Sch.; m. Dhanan, e. d. o. M. Naicker of Estcourt; 1 s., 2d; taught at York Rd. Sch. for several years; also at Estcourt, Sutherlands, Carlisle St. Sch.; — vice-prin. Umzinto High Sch., 1949-51; prin. of Ton- gaat Jnr. Sch., 1951- 55; principal Baitjoo Maharaj Ind. Sch. 1955-57; pro- moted Supervisor 1958. Public activities: Scout Comm. North Coast 1953-58; treas. Pietermaritzburg Boy Scouts Assn.; treas. M.D.I.F.A. 1947-48; acting treas., vice-pres. S.S.M. Temple; co-founder Divine Life Soc.; pres. H.Y.M.A.; inspector Venacular Sch.; treas. and sec. Estcourt T.C.; hon. life vice-pres, founder and sec. Alexander County Ind. F.A. 1950; was sec. of Umzinto Child Welfare and F.O.S.A.; encouraged uniforms at Natal schools; patron Good- will Club; chairman Woodlands Old Boys Club; sec. Pietermaritzburg Tech. Institute; sec. N.I.T.S., Pieter- maritzburg; sec. Natal Ind. Schools F. Assn.; sec. and treas. Royals F.C., Estcourt; was mem. Umzinto L.T.C. Recreation: Sport. Address: 533 Church St., Pietermaritzburg. PADAYACHY, Arumugam Thabdray; general dealer; b. Transvaal, May 10, 1916; s. @f Thandray Paday- achy; educ. Doornfontein Ind. afd Col. School; m. Peggy, d. of D. Vander Weetring; 4 s., 1 d. Business: New Era Dry Cleaners, est. 1947. Sporting activities: An active soccer and cricket player; repr. Transvaal in Sam China Tournament 1935-43, against All-India 1934, S.A. Indians at Cape Town 1939; found. mem. Vredons F.C. from 1933, capt. for six years, 1933-39, and won for his team the Wits & Tvl. League for six successive years; played cricket for Vredons and New THE SOUTH AFRICAN Era; delegate to Wits J.F. Assn. for Vredons and Rovers F.C.; delegate to W.W.I. Cricket Union for New Era C.C.; a found. mem. of the Ist Johannes- burg Indian Scouts. Address: 20 Davies St., Doorn- fontein, Johannesburg. PAHLINEY, Arumug- bam Peter, head- master; b. Re union, 1903; educ. Dbn.; m. G. Chellan of Port Shepstone; 1 s. 3 d.; taught at St. Aidans Boys’ Sch. in 1920; Verulam Govt. aided [Indian Sch.; Springfield Methodist Indian Sch.; Doorn- fontein and Ferreira Govt. Indian Sch., Tvl; toured Africa on bicycle; taught at Esperanza, St. Michaels; later prin. Oatlands School in 1946; started the Scout movement in Natal in 1928; Asst. Div. Commissioner, Natal South Coast; former pres. of the Ind. Teachers’ Soc., Port Shepstone; pres. of the Oatlands Angling Club. Hobby: Photography. Address: c/o Oatlands Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Fasca- dale, Natal. PAKKIRI, Dhanigachallam; b. Durban, 1936, e. s. of late Pakkiri, of Durban; educ. Tanjore Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Sastri College (J.C. 1954); training as nurse at King Edward VIII Hospital. Public activities: Riverside Social and Cultural Society. Hobbies: Out- door sports. Address: King Edward VIII Hospital; Res., 444 Riverside Rd., Durban North. PALEKAR, Abdul Kader Ismail, manufacturer (delicatessen); b. Shive, Dist. Ratnagiri, 1927; s. of Ismail Palekar; educ. in India and Cape Town; 1 s., 2 d.; took control of father’s bus. in 1950; started delicatessen bus. after gaining special permission from the meat control board, developed to one of the largest firms in the Cape Province; the only Indian engaged in this type of bus., and supplying the entire Cape Province and trading as Palmo meat manufac- turers. Public activities: Associated with all Moslem Soc. in C.T, Address: Res., 12 Signal St., Cape Town, Phone 28054; Bus., 19 Chatam Rd., Salt River, Phone 55186. Branches at 78 and 41 Rose St., Cape Town. PALSANIA, Chunilal Chhitram, b. Boohari, Bar- doli, Dist. Surat, 1911; educ. Trafalgar High School, Cape Town, Methodist Boys’ School, Baroda and Anglo-American College, Madras; on return to S.A. settled in Cape Town; started fruiterer’s bus.; also repres. of Sun Life Assurance of Canada; sworn translator in English to Gujerati language for Supreme Court of S.A. Public activities: Was organising sec. Cape Indian Congress; joint se¢. Hindu Assoc.; general sec. Mesuria Mitra Mandal; also sec. and spokesman for the commission to enquire in to the subject matter of the Separate Representative of Voters Act Validity and Amendment Bill, 1953. Address: 39 Roger St., Cape Town, P.O. Box 4624 INDIAN WHO’S WHO 163 PALSANIA, Dahyab- hai Sitharam; hair- dresser and gen. dlr.; b. Cape Town, 1930; s. o. S. R. Palsania; educ. at Trafalgar High Sch.; m. Shanti- bhen, 2nd. d. o. D. Ratanjee; 2 s., 1 d.; business was estd. by father; trading under the name of Palsania’s Hairdressing Saloon; also deals in fancy goods and _ tobacco; m. in India and re- turned in 1949. Pub. act.: Secty. of Cape Hindu C.C., 1955-57; sec. of the Cape Hindu Bhajan Mandal 1955-57; takes keen interest in Hindu religious affairs and matters affecting the Indian community in general; mem. of Everest Recreation Club. Recreation: Cricket and table tennis. Address: Bus., 66 Wale St., Cape Town, Phone 35122; Res., 173 Bree St., Cape Town, Phone 34331. PANDARAM, Subrayan; businessman; b. May 16, 1916, in Verulam, Natal; s. of Vasantharaya Panda- ran; educ. Fairbreeze Indian School; m. Anandaye, 2nd d. of Arjun, of Compensation, Natal; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Prop. Dicks Lounge, est. 1953, Stanger; served the Tongaat Sugar Co. (Cranbrook) and Stan- ger Providers for several years; caters for weddings, parties and banquets. Public activities: Singer, musi- cian and tutor in dramatics. Recreation: Fishing. Address: Bus., Phone 258, 63 Couper St., Stanger; Res., Indian Village, Stanger. PANDAY, Jaikram Ramdin, photogr.; 4th s. late Jaikram Pan- ay, of Dbn.; b. Dbn., May 7, 1918; m. only d. late Toolsie Ma- haraj of Umzinto; 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Mitchell Crescent and Higher Grade Sch., Durban; after leaving school served five-year ap- prenticeship in photo- graphy, then started own business; trading as Panday’s Studio, at Etna Lane, Dbn.; now has branches in Leopold St. and at Sydenham; takes interest in the social, religious and sporting spheres of community life and holds several official positions. Address: Bus., 62 Etna Lane, Phone 24886, Durban; Res., “Glenroy,” 243 Kennedy Rd., Phone 884250, Clare Estate, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 2

164 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO PARAGBHAI, Ran- chod Vallabh; general merchant; b. Jhburg., Dec. 25, 1932; e. s. o. Vallabh Ponajbhai of Johannesburg; _educ. Jhburg. Indian High Sch.; m. Jasuben, d. o. Chitta Dullabh of Jhburg.; 1 s., J d.; in partnership with brother in the firm of Paragbhai & Sons; is one of the leading tobacco _— wholesalers in Transvaal among Indians, Public act.: Secty. Patidar Samaj, Jhburg. Address: Sa Diagonal St., P.O. Box 6130, Phone 331720; Res., 21 Patidar Mansions, 13 Kort St., Johannesburg PARASURAMEN, Munian, b. Cato Manor, Durban, 1933; 2nd s. of Munian, of Durban; educ. Sastri College, matriculated in 1952; after leaving school took up employment at the King Edward VIII, in 1953; was qualified 1956. Public activities: Mem. of the S.A. Red Cross Society; mem. of the D.I.M.ES. F.A.; mem. of the Dimes evening Sch. Board; hon. teacher at Dimes evening sch.; mem. of the Ramblers F.C. Recreation: Soccer, cricket and swimming. Address: 14 Walter Place, Mayville, Durban. PARBHOO, = Narsai Bhoola, merchant; b. Kevitha, Baroda State, 1908; 0. s. of Bhoola Parbhoo, woollen meht., Jhburg; 2 s., 3 d.; educ. Govt. Ind. Sch., Jhburg; came to S.A. in 1919, joined father’s bus. in 1926; in 1929 started own bus. as silk mcht., Orient Silk House; in 1935 gave up silk bus. and started as whlsle. woollen mcht.; trad- ing as B. Parbhoo, distributors of special woollen lines; branch firm in Johannesburg and in 1938 opened business as general dealers and produce buyers, trading as H. A. Kader Cash Store, Bank, Dist. Potchefstroom, employer of European and Indian labour; also has business connection in Natal and Portuguese East Africa. Public activities: Was member of T.1.C.; sec. Bespoke Tailoring Employers’ Assoc. (Indian Sec- tion), one of its foundation members; was mem. of executive of Holiday Fund Scheme of the Council; chairman of its sub-committee; was mem. of Hindu Youth League, Transvaal; exec. mem. of the Trans- vaal Dargi Assocn.; presented the “Parbhoo’s Float- ing Football Trophy” to Northern Natal Ind. Foot- ball Assocn.; was sec. and founder Transvaal United Tailors’ Club 1935; was treas. Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj. Recreation: Literature. Address: 57-59 Market St., Johannesburg, Phone 33-7923, P.O. Box 2120. Tel. Add., ““Nurshi,” Johannesburg. PARBHOOBHAI, Val- labhbhai, gnrl. dlr.; b. Delvada, Dist. Surat, India, in 1919; s. of Parbhoobhai Naran; educ. in India; m. Manchhiben, d. of Vallabhbhai B. Patel; 4 s., 3d joined Pic- canini Store, est. by Narsaibhai Parbhoob- hai in 1931; ex-direc- tor of Messrs. N. Parbhoo Bros., of 42 Market St., Jhb. Came to S.A. in 1930, and settled in Benoni. Public activities: Chair. Benoni Hindi Mahasabha; com. mem. Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; vice-pres. Benoni Sports Club; ex-ch. Benoni Gugarati Seva Samaj; mem. Transvaal Koli H. Mandal. Add.: P.O. Box 480, Benoni, Transvaal, Phone 54-2230. PARDASEE, Jeevaruthanum Peter, b. Glendale, Stanger; o. s. of Paradasee; m. Lutchmee, d. of R. Naidoo, of Clairwood; 2 s., 1 d.; clerk at Glendale Sugar Mill; later joined the staff at the King Edward VIII Hospital as a male nurse. Public activities: Mem. of Baptist Temple. Recreation: Soccer. Address: Res., 19 Bristow Rd., Mayville, Durban; Phones: Res., 886067; Bus., 56131. PAREKH, Casielal Raghavjee; merchant, com. of oaths; b. May 19, 1908, in Verulam, Natal; s. of Raghava- jee Devjee Parekh; educ, Verulam Indian School; m. Rambha Maiyani, of Umbrelli, Kathiawar, India; 1 s., 3 d. Business: Propr. Choonilall’s Cash Store, Verulam. Pub- lic activities: Mem. V. and Dist. Ind. Child Welfare Soc.; mem. National Cancer Fd.; mem. Verulam Hindu Crematorium. Add.: 49 Wick Street, Verulam, Natal. "7 PARKER, Dawood Abdulla, \erchant: b. Karjie, Dist. Ratnagiri, 1921; s. of Abdulla Ismail Parker; m. 1 d.; was assoc. with uncle’s bus.; toured India in 1939; on return took over father’s business, trading under the name of D. A. Parker. Public activities: Mem. of the Karjee Educational Soc. Recreation: Football. Address: Bus. and Res., 349 Main Rd., Maitland, Phone 51974, Cape Town. THE SOUTH AFRICAN WE EM. PARUK FAMILY Wr INDIAN WHO'S WHO 165 PARUK, Ismail Mohamed (late); b. Kathor, 1867, arrived in Durban from Mauritius in 1884; estd. bus. in West St., Durban, as retail and wholesale merchants, which has developed into one of the largest bus. concerns in the Province; prop. of Glendale Sugar Mills; employed large number of Indians in the Mill. Pub. act.: Was chairman of the Prince of Wales Reception Comm.; presided at the N.I.C. banquet given in honour of late H.R.H. Prince George; placed his home at the disposal of the late Rt. Hon. Srinivasan Sastri; trustee of several public and private trusts, including the Surat Anjuman Islam and Jumna Musjid, also the Anjuman Islamic Madressa; was foundation mem. of the Orient Club. Died Dec. 23, 1942. PARUK, Dawood Isiuail, wholesale merchant; b. at Dur- ban, 1903; s. of the late E. M. Paruk; educ. at Higher Grade Sch., Durban. Bus.: Director of the firm of E. M. Paruk and Glendale Sugar Estate, also Glenmill & D. I. Paruk, general dealers, Stanger. Club: Orient Club. Address: 329 Pine St., Durban, Phone 24089; Res., 1 Milner Rd., Durban, Phone 33888. F PARUK, Amod Ismail, com- pany director; b. Durban, 1907; s. of E. M. Paruk; educ. Higher Grade Sch. Durban. Bus.: Director of A. I. Paruk & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., also of the firm of E. M. Paruk and Glendale Sugar Estate. Pub. act.: Grantee of the Parnkabad Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. Club: Orient Club. Address: 329 Pine St., Durban, Phone 24089; Res., 3 4th Ave., Durban, Phone 36391. PARUK, Mohamed Ismail, company director; b, in Dur- ban, 1913; s. of late E. M. Paruk; educ. at Sastri College; director of the firm of E. M. Paruk and Glendale Sugar Estate. Rec.: Tennis. Club: Orient Club. Address: 329 Pine St., Durban, Phone 24089; Res., 483 Currie Rd., Durban, Phone 33093.

---

## Page 3

166 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PARKER, Hoosain Ebrahim, councillor, sales repres. for United Tobacco Co.; b. Cape Town, Feb, 1, 1928; s. o. E. A. Parker; educ. Trafal- gar High Sch.; 2 s., 2 d.; on leaving sch. joined father in bus.; trading as Parker Bros. at 319 Hanover St., Cape Town. Pub. act.: Jt. hon. secty. Habibia Muslim Educ. Inst.; mem. and ex-treas. Muslim Hospitals Welfare Soc.; exec. mem, Ind. Traders’ Assoc. and Athlone & Dist. Traders’ Assoc.; mem. Karjie Anjuman Educ. Soc.; pres. Orient Sports Club; vice-pres. W.P.I.F. Assoc.; ex-hon. sec. and ex- pres., now hon. life vice-pres. W.P. Ind. Cricket Union; hon. sec. W.P. Cricket Board of Control; organiser Kenya tour; ex-pres. S.A. Ind. Cricket Union; ex-vice-pres. S.A. Cricket Board of Control; delegate to S.A. Ind. Cricket Union; patron Ashley Table Tennis Club and Hillcrest Table Tennis Club; vice-pres. W.P. Table Tennis Union; ex-vice-chairman Preston United F.C.; delegate to Cape F. Assn.; hon. treas. W.P. Cricket Federation. Address: Parkers Bldg.. 5th St., Welcome Est., Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 698105. % PARKER, Ismail Mahomed; b. Ratna- girl, Bombay. India; educ. Ratnagiri; ar- rived in South Africa in 1932; started own bus. under name of I. M. Parker; visited India several times; joint secty. of Muslim Educ. Soc. of Elsies River; asst. sec. Seraj- jull Islam Educ. Soc.; takes keen interest in work of upliftment of Muslim community, and Islam liter. Add.: Bus. and res, 479 Klipfontein Road, Elsies River, Cape Town. PATAK, Ramsunder, Hindu High Priest; b. Estcourt, 1893; s. of Bendasari Patak; m. Lakpathie, d. of Hira Maharaj; 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Hindi. Public activities: Trustee Govt.-aided Sch., Dannhauser; management board. chairman, Arya Samaj (Dannhauser); comm. mem. School Meals Service; hon. life vice-pres., N.D.LF.A.; comm. mem. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; social and religious worker, Recreation: Sports. Address: P.O. Box 3, Dannhauser, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO PARUK, Suleman Mamoojee, wholesale merchant, trading as S. M. Paruk & Co.; b. April, 1903, in Dbn., Natal; only s. of Mamoojee Ma- homed Paruk, br. of the late E. M. Paruk; educ. Higher Grade Govt. School, Dbn. Business: In 1923 be- came connected with the wholesale firm of E. M. Paruk, mer- chants & sugar manu- facturers; started own whlsle. bus. as S. M. Paruk & Co. in 1950. Public activities: Ex-joint treas. S.A.J. Congress; com. mem. N.J. Congress; exec. mem. N.I. Organisation; trustee Orient Islamic Institute; mem. Orient Club; mem. International Club; holds official position in many societies; went to Mecca for Haj in 1946; visited India, the Middle East and Europe in 1954. Address: Bus., 76 Commercial Road, Phone 25255; Res., 17 Derby St., Phone 22013, Durban, Natal. PATEL, Abdulrahman, salesman; b. May 30, 1930; e. s. of C. Patel; educ. Sastri College. Bus.: Was em- ployed by Gallo Africa, Ltd.; has travelled extensively in South Africa. Public activities: Was mem. Moon- lighters F.C.; mem. Kismet Tennis C.; mem. Young Aces Tennis Club. Recreation: Angling; mem. of Orient Fishing Club. Address: 130 First Ave., Durban. PATEL, Balloobhai Dullabhbhai, general dealer and fresh pro- duce; b. at Jhb., Tvl. in 1919; s. of Dul- labhbhai Vira; educ. in India; m. Maniben, d.o. Narsai Parsotam; 3 s. Business: Sunrise Fruit Market, 37 Market St., Jhb., with branch at No. 9 Hos- pital St. Cleveland. Public activities: Ex- sec. “Umrakh” Seva Samaj. Address: 37 Market St., Jhb., Ph. 34-1679. \ PATEL, Bhagabahi Koovarjee| merchant; b. Surat, India, 1918; s. of Ganesbahi; educ. Bhut-port, India; m. Pemi-Bhen; d. of Narotham, of Simada, India; estd. bus. in 1946, trading as B. Ki Patel & Co.; later opened second bus., trading as National Fruit Store. Public activities: Mem. United Hindu Assoc.; mem. Cape Hindu C.C.; interested in religious work. Recreation: Sport. Address: National Fruit Store, Main Rd., Wynberg, Cape Town, Phone 70624. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 167 2 The B. M. Patel Family & PATEL, Urmilaben Chatur- bhai, B.A. (Hons.), b. Vaso, India, 1931; d. of C. K. Patel; educ, at Wilson College, Bombay; m. J. B. Patel, ec. s. of late B, M. Patel; 1 d.; graduated at Bombay University; with honours in Gujerati and Philosophy. Pub. act.: Sec. of the Gujerati Hindu Mahila Mundal; Vice- President of the Guijerati Cultural Society; adjudged as the best Hindi speaker at a public speaking con- test for the Swami Bha- wani Dayal Trophy for two consecutive years: responsible for the Editing of the Gujerati Hindu Mahila Mundal Silver Jubilee Brochure; sub- mitted and read a paper on the roll of Indian women at the conference of the S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha. Foundation Member of the Indian Women's Literary Group. Rec.: Badminton and music. PATEL, Bhailal Mathoorbhai (late), Commissioner for Oaths, 1935; b. Dharmaj, dist. Baroda, May 5, 1887; educ. Dharmaj and Petlad High School; m. Jhaverbai, d. of Motibhai Ishwarbhai Patcl, of Nadiad; 2 s. Came to South Africa December 12, 1903; first stayed in Maritzburg: took up commercial career; moved to Dur- ban in 1918. Pub. act.: was Sec. of Reception Comm. during the visit of Bhai Paramanand to Maritzburg; took part in the Pas- sive Resistance movement in 1913; Foundation Mem. of H.Y.M.A., Maritzburg: Joint Treasurer of the S.A.1.C.; Sec. Gandhi Library and Parsee Rustomjee Hall since 1925; Mem, of the Executive since 1921; did much to encourage the students to make use of the Library and was also responsible for starting a Women’s Day at the Library; Reddi Unemployment Committee: Treasurer of the Sir Kurma Indian Child Welfare Society: Indo-European Council; Bombay Presidency Hindu Association; Chairman of the Hindu Crematorium Society and Hindu Sham- shan Fund; Anglo Guierati School Hindu Maha Sabha, Trustee of the Arya Prathinidi Sabha of Natal; Treasurer of the Society for the Advancement of Indian Culture; in 1914 organised and was mainly instrumental for the dispensary at Dharmaj; died 6th March, 1950. PATEL, Natvarlal Bhailal, b. Durban, 1930; y. s. of late B. M. Patel: educ. at Greyville Govt.-aided Indian School, and St. Anthony School, Durban: m, Jayaben, d. of C. C, Amin, of India; 2 d.: keenly interested in all forms of sport; Joint Sponsor with his brother, J. B. Patel, of the RB. M. Patel Memorial Library at the M. L. Sultan Technica} College. Rec.: Music. Add.: Flat 5, 71 Prince Edward Street. and President of the S.A. PATEL, Jayaben, b. San- Jan, India; 2nd d. of C. C. Amin; b. 14th March. 1931; educ, Vaso, India: m. N. B. Patel; 2 d.; an active worker for the social upliftment of the Gujerati community. Add.: Flat 5, 71 Prince Edward Street, Durban. PATEL, Jayantilal Bhailal, B.A.; Attorney at Law; b. Durban, 23rd May, 1924; ¢. s. of late B. M. Patel, of Durban; educ. at Sastri College, N.U.C, and Law College, Bombay University; was a member of the Middle Temple, London; m. Urmilaben Chaturbhai Patel; d. of C. K. Patel, of Karamsad, India: 1 d.; was admitted as an Attorney (Supreme Court of S.A.), N.P.D., in 1950; Matriculated at the age of 16; Graduated at the age of 20. Public act.: was a Mem. of the Executive of the N.U.C. Students’ Union; Comm. Mem. of the Gujerati Cultural Scty.; Patron of the Bharat Sun- geeth Physical Culture and Boxing Academy; Joint Sponsor with his brother N. B. Patel, of the B. M. Patel Memorial Library at the M. L. Sultan Technical College. Rec.: Indian classical music and svimming. Add.: Res., Flat 5, 71 Prince Edward Strect, Phone 6-2116: Bus., 203/205 Lakhani Chambers, 2 Saville Street, Durban, Phones 2-2082 and 2-8254; P.O. Box 570. PATEL, Jhaverbai (late), wife of Bhailal Mathoorbhai Patel, e, d. of Motibhai Ishwarbhai Patel, of Nadiad; b. Nadiad, dist. Kaira, July, 1896; educ. at Nadiad. Came to South Africa in 1917, Public act.: was an ardent worker in the cause of Social Reform in her community and for an elevated status for the Indian women of South Africa; Vice-President of the first Indian Women's Associa- tion in Durban; founded the Gujerati Hindu Mahi!a Mundal, Durban, November, 1930; was also its President: Mem. of the Indian Child Welfare Soc. Rec.: Motoring: the first Gujerati lady to have a driver's licence in South Africa; died September 10, 1951.

---

## Page 4

168 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PATEL, Chootoo Pra- bhat Odhay; general dir.; b. Shikar, India; s. of Odhav Bhaga; educ. Indian Govt. School, Johannesburg; m. Sitha, d. of Naran Dayal; 3 s. Business known as Prabhat Fruit Market, est. in 1948. Mem. of Trans- vaal Patidar Society; Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj. Interested in aviation; holds private pilot’s licence; mem. Hindu Cricket Club. Address: 179b Market 4 St., Johannesburg. PATEL, Bhikhu, merchant; b. Sisosdra, India, Dec. 7, 1927; e. s. of P. Rama, of Johannesburg; educ. in India; m. Shantiben; 2 s., 2 d.; set up bus. trading as P. R. Patel & Co., wholesale merchants and im- porters in 1941. Interested in all branches of sport. Address: Bus., 41 Avenue Rd., Fordsburg, Johannes- burg. Tel. Add.: “Naranjee,” Johannesburg, P.O. Box 9069, Phones 335094 and 334532, Johannesburg. PATEL, Bhula Hira, general merchant; s. of Hira Ooka; b. Satem, India, May 23, 1924; educ. Pratab- singh College of Commerce and Economics, India; m. Mani, d. of Bhikhubhai B. Patel; I s., 3 d. Bus.: Estd. by grandfather in 1926; joined the firm in 1947, trading as O. M. Patel. Public activities: Mem. Trans- vaal Patidor Soc.; Satem Seva Society. Address: 14 Diagonal St., Johannesburg. PATEL, Daya Kushal, general merchant; b. Navsari Dist., India, 1904; s. of Kushal Madhav; educ. in India; m. Nathi. Bus.: In partnership in 1951; estd, own bus. in 1954, known as D. K. Patel & Sons; hon. secty. Transvaal Patidar Soc.; ex-pres. Bharat Sharda Man- dir Sch.; mem. Sch. comm.; chairman Arya Yurvik Viaum Shala; ex-chairman Hindu C.C. Add.: 22 Diagonal St., Phone 34-1249, Johannesburg. PATEL, Kara Jivan; wholesale fruit merchant; s. of Jivan Lalla; b. Bombay, India; educ. Kadod High School, India; m. Jasoo, d. of Parbhoo Rama; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Wholesale fruit merchant, est. 1930. Public activities: Mem. Transvaal Patidar Society and: the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; mem. Hindu C.C. Address: 20a Diagonal St., Johannesburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO PATEL, Ismail Essop, merchant; b. Klerks- * dorp, Tvl., Oct. 31, 1914; m. 2nd d. of E. l. Patel, merchant of Jhburg.; educ. Govt. Indian Sch., Jhburg; on leaving sch. joined father’s bus. trading as Joosub Wholesale Merchants. Add.: 49a Market St, Jhburg., P.O. Box 2601, Phone 33-1516. PATEL, Laloo Bhag- wan; businessman; b. Surat, India, Sept. 14, 1908; e. s. of Bhagwan Mooljee; educ. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Dur- ban; m. Revaben, 3rd d. of Kalyan Bhikha; 4 s., 2 d. Business: Prop. L. B. Patel & Co., est. 1935; ex- bookkeeper to many Indian firms in Dur- ban. Public activities: Ex-sec. & treas. Surat Hindu Ass.; sec. Surat Hindu Educ. Assoc.. grantee, Surat Hindu Indian Sch. and Surat Hindu Platoon School; patron of several social bodies; treas. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; official, Durban Ind. Retailers’ Assoc.; official Gugariti Mahila Mundal. Recreation: Reading, social work. Address: Phone 23312, 127 Victoria Street, Durban. PATEL, Mangalbhai Vallabhdas, wholesale merchant; s. of Val- labhdas; b. in Dhar- maj, India; educ. Pet- lad Anglo Vernacular Sch., India; m. Dee- wali: 2 s., 3 d. Bus.: Manchester Trading Co. (Pty.) Ltd., estd. $923 and Matco Walslrs.; estd. bus. ing Pretoria in 1906; traded till 1917; went to India in 1918 and returned: to S.A. in 1919; started whisle. bus. in Kort St., and then in Market St.. Johannesburg; visited Germany in 1923, and was THE SOUTH AFRICAN present at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924; was presented to the late General Botha, and was associated with Mahatma Gandhi during the Passive Resistance Movement; suffered imprisonment for a short period. Public activities: Chairman Pre- toria Indian Assn.; mem. Transvaal British Assn.; Transvaal Ind. Congress. Address: 47 Commissioner St., Johannesburg. PATEL, Manibhai Kikabhai, B.A. (Hons.), B.T., D.P.Ed.; teacher; b. Duvada- Vangri, Gandevi, Surat, India, May 12, 1916; s. of Kikabhai Kalabhai Patel; educ. University of Bom- bay, India; m. 2 s. Called by Tvl. Hindu Seva Samaj in 1947; ex-principal Shree Gandhi Bharat Vidya- laya, now supervisor; at present teaching in Ferreira Ind. Govt. School, Jhb. Public activities: Supt. Jhb. Centre, Hindi Vidya Mandir of Rastra Bhasha Pra- char Samili Wardha; sec. T. Koli Hitwadhak Mandal; ex-ch., now mem., T. Gugarati Shikshak Sanga; com. mem, Johannesburg Ind. Soc. Wel. Assn.; ch. Bharat Yavak Mandal; ex-ch. Adarsh Yuvak Mandal. Add.: 50 Fox Street, Johannesburg. PATEL, Nathoobhai Ravjeebhai, merchant; b. Jallal- pur, Surat, India, 1924; s. of R. K. Patel; educ. Jallalpur, Cape Town, evening classes; m. Koowarb- hen, d. of F. Wallabhjavrie; 2 s., 2 d.; arrived from India in 1938, assoc. with father’s bus. later estd., bus. in partnership with P. Jeramabha I. Laloobhai in 1947, trading as J. B. Patel & Co.; visited India in 1947. Public activities: Mem. of Cape Hindu C.C. and Cape Hindu Bhajan Mundal. Recreation: Gujerati literature. Address: Bus., Tramway Terminus, Main Rd., Wynberg, Cape Town, Phone 73909; Res., 48 Lester Rd., Wynberg, Cape Town. PATEL, Parbhoobhai Manchhabhai, director of com- panies; b. June 26, 1909, Munsad, Surat, India; educ. Navsari High School, Navsari, India; s. s. of Manchhbhai Gosai, Munsad, Surat, India; m. Mani- ben, d. of Hirabhai Ookabhai, Sisdora, India; 3 s., 5 d.; was formerly engaged in wholesale produce and fruit business; commenced present bus. as Supreme Timber Co. (Pty.), Ltd., in 1950 and previously as Builders Merchants. Public activities: Comm. Patidar Society, Johannesburg and took active part in estab- lishing the Bharat Sharda Mundir and was inspector of the school for many years; is keenly interested in all matters pertaining to the general upliftment of the Indian community. Address: Bus., 180 Main Rd., Newlands, Johannesburg, Phone 273415; Res. 71 Crown Rd., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 33-7909. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 169 PATEL, Ratilal Tribhovandas (Natwarlal Chunilal), wholesale merchant; b. Dharmaj, India; s. of Datar Chunilal, also known as Tribhovandas; educ. V. N. High Sch., Dharmaj; m. Subhedra, d. of Khusaldas Gocaldas Patel; 5 s., 2 d. Bus.: New Main Reef Trading Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Navendra & Co., ex-partner of I. C. Ashabhai & Co., and managing director of Reliance Agencies (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities: Treas. Tvl. Ind. Congress; mem, Tvl. Hindu Seva Samaj; donated liberally to charity in India and this country; among them are £8,000 towards building Boys’ Gugarati School at Dhamaj, and £2,500 towards Kindergarten School at Dhamaj. Interested in Hindu religious affairs; visited India several times and travelled extensively in Africa. Address: Macosa Hse., 17 Commissioner St., No. 1 Kort St.; Res., Flat 53, 5th Floor, Orient House, corner Baker and Commis- sioner Sts., Johannesburg, Phones 341553, 341554, 333716 (during mornings). PATEL, Suleman Essa, wholesale and retail merchant; b. Jodiya, 1910. Club: Bridgeview. Address: 99 High Ridge Rd., Durban. PATEL, Vallaybhai Kashibhai; general dealer; s. of Kashibhai; b. Dharmaj, Baroda State, India; educ. Dharmaj High School, India; m. Ganga, d. of J. H. Amin, of Tarapeer; 2 s., 3 d., one son at Wits Uni- versity; mem. Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj. Address: 241 Commissioner Street, cor. of Greene Street, Johan- nesburg. PATHER, C. J., C.O., land and estate agent and Govt. valuator; b. Durban, March 26, 1912; s. of V. S. C. Pather; matriculated; joined father’s bus. in 1930, trading as V. S. C. Pather and Son; on death of father, became sole proprietor. Public activities: Exec, mem. Hindu Tamil Instit., now amalgamated to Tamil Verdic Soc., now hon. life vice-pres. of same; hon. auditor Durban Ind. Surf Life Saving Club for last 20 years. Address: 15 Foundry Lane, Durban. PATHER, Coopoo- samy Jagathesan; land and estate agent; b. March 26, 1912, Dur- ban; e. s. of V. S.C. Pather, Durban; educ. Higher Grade Indian Sch. and Marine Col- lege, Durban; matric.; m., 4 s., 2 d. Business: Prop. V. S. C. Pather & Son. iS Foundry Lane, Durban, land & est. agents; com. of oaths, 1944; a Govt. valuator. Public acti- vities: Ex-com. mem. Hindu Tamil Institute; ‘ ; patron and mem. Pre- mier Physical Culture Club; life vice-pres. Natal Tamil Vedic Soc.; hon. auditor, D.I. Life Saving Club. Recreation: Gardening. Address: Bus., Phone 22008, 15 Foundry Lane, Durban; Res., 93 First Avenue, Phone 29068, Durban.

---

## Page 5

170 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PATHER, Coopoo- samy Nadasen, land and estate agent; 2nd sy of “Jate -V._S.-C: Pather; b. Dbn., July 4, 1914; m. Ballamah, 2nd d, of late Soobra- mania Pather of Mauritius; 1 s., 3 d.; educ. St. Aijdan’s. Higher Grade and Sastri College, Dbn.; joined father’s bus. as clerk after leaving coll. in 1937, and admitted in partnership in 1940; launched on his own in 1943, trading as C. N. Pather, land and estate agent, at Lakhani Chambers, now at Jeram Mansions. Public activities: In 1933 founded the Dur- ban Indian Life Savers’ Club of which he was sec. for 12 years then resigned after being appointed as its hon. legal advisor; was instrumental in forming Red Cross Detachment 54 in 1945; was pres. Clair- wood Taxi-owners’ Assn. 1948-52; was first sec. Premier Physical Culture and Boxing Academy in 1952, now vice-pres.; was largely instrumental in send- ing R. P. Govender to England to compete in “Mr. Universe” contest; was sec. of Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust for 12 years. Recreation: Swimming, physical culture. Address: Bus., 5-6 Jeram Mansions. 144-146 Victoria St., Phone 68648, Durban; Res., 167 First Ave., Durban, Natal. PATHER, Darmalingum (S. D. Pather), b. Pmburg., Jan. 18, 1926; s. of Sockalingum Pather; educ. Wood- lands Sec. School; m., 2 s., 1 d. Bus.: Jeweller and general dealer; prop. Pather’s Gift House, Pmburg. Public activities: Patron Kalaivani Orchestra, Pmburg.; patron Yogananda and Vivekenanda Study Circle. Address: Bus., 511 Church St.; Res., 37 William St., Phone, bus. 26347, res. 28154. PATHER, Manickum, Nadarajan, the e. s. of the late S. M. Pather; b. in Durban on Nov. 4, 1922; educ. at the Clairwood Sen. Boys’ School and later at Sastri College; m. e. d. of Mr. and Mrs. B. S. Pather, of Durban: 2 s, 1 d. Entered into business of real est. and company sec. 1950, now having an estab. business at 15 Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria St., Durban; took an active part in social welfare; was the record clerk and sec. of the Clairwood Area Care INDIAN WHO'S WHO Committee of the F.O.S.A. 1946 and 1947; founded the Orient Social Club in 1948 and was its first president, 1948-49. Recreation: Tennis; member of the Pre- mier Lawn Tennis Club and its sec. from 1950 to 1955; sec. of the Premier Table Tennis Club 1953 to 1955; treas. of the Clairwood School Old Boys’ Club 1952- 1953, and vice-pres. 1954-1955. Interested in religion; sec. Visva Karma Sungum, 1946 to 1955; sec. Natal Tamil Vedic Society Cultural Study Circle 1955; sec. Natal Indian Lawn Tennis Association 1954 and 1955 and delegate to the South African Indian Lawn Tennis Association repr. Natal. Address: Bus., 15 Valbro Chambers, Victoria Street, P.O. Box 2451, Phone 29429, Durban; Res., 115 Houghton Road, Rossburgh, Phone 819326. PATHER, Moonsamy Mathramocthoo, watch maker and jeweller; b. at Pietermaritzburg, 1902; s. of Moonsamy Pather; educ. at John Thomas and Higher Grade Indian Schs., Pietermaritzburg; m. Janekee Pillay, d. of C. Pillay, of Vryberg, Cape Town; 3 s., 1 d.; served apprenticeship with G. Pather, of East London; later employed by J. C. Beatson, of Durban, for 23 years; estd. own bus. in Cape Town, trading as Standard Qualified Watchmaker; possesses a cer- tificate for outstanding workmanship from J. C. Beatson. Public activities: Comm. mem. Tamil Edu- cational Cultural Soc.; patron of the Saraswathee Orchestra; worked devotedly to estb. soc. for the upliftment of the Tamil community of Cape Town. Address: Harnaker’s Bldg., Lawerence Rd., Athlone, Phone 692355; Res., 1 Hazel Rd., Athlone, Cape Town. PATHER, Narayanar Dharamalingam; mer- chant and jeweller; b. Durban, 1892; y. s. of late Narayanar Pather of Durban; m. Moor- vay, d. of Poonsamy Pather of Kimberley; 4S: Ss. 4 dy veduc. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Dbn.; estd. bus. as mnfr. jeweller in 1916, and as gen. mer- : chant in 1923; Two , > sons, Thirumothar 4 atid Gopaul, are med. rs) : : pf&actitioners, while a esac ae daughter, Indrani, is also a first-year med. student. Public activities: Vice-pres. of Tamil Vedic Soc., Durban; active member of Thirukootam; land for the Umgeni Temple was donated by his late father. Address: 196 Umgeni Rd., Dbn., Phone 21787. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 171 PATHER, Ponnoo- samy Ruthnam; land and estate agent: b. June 13, 1895, at Port Louis, Mauritius; e. s. of A. P. Pather; educ. Pvt. Ind. High Sch., Pmburg.; m. Savithiri, e. d. of T. P. Pather; 5 s., 2 d. Bus.: Pather & Co., land and estate agent, estd. 1919. Pub. act: Trus. R. K. Khan Hospital and Dispensary Trust and Ind. Medical Services Trust; chairman Fund Raising Comm, of the M. L. Sultan Tech. College Fund; hon. sec. Natal Ind. Congress 1928-33; S.A. Ind. Congress 1928-33; Y.M. Vedic Soc, 1915- 26; Hindu T. Inst. 1918-1951; Col. Born & Settlers’ Assoc. 1933-39; Natal Ind. Assoc. 1939-43; N. Ind. Organisation 1949-52; S.A. Ind. Organisation from 1950; pres. N. J. Organisation; N. I. Council Child Welfare; D. I. Surf Life Saving Club; Nat. Ind. Assoc. for Soil Conservation; chairman Ind. Educ. Comm.; ch. Council N. T. Vedic Soc.; mem. depu- tation S.A.LC. to London 1946, re Asiatic Land Tenure Act; assisted in the amalgamation of N.I.C. and C.B. & S. Ind. Assoc.; Natal Ind. Assoc. and N.1.C.; Hindu Tamil Inst. and Y.M. Vedic Soc.; served 2+ months imprisonment in the Durban Goal for defying the Pegging Act, thus becoming the first Indian to resort to passive resistance, the matter of his incarceration was raised in the House of Com- mons; has been connected with politics since 1920, and was one of those who resuscitated the N.I.C.; drafted innumerable presidential addresses and memoranda on matters affecting the Indians; led deputation to the late Field-Marshal J. C. Smuts and H. G. Lawrence, Dr. T. E. Donges, the Administra- tors of Natal and the Mayors of various local bodies; attended the United Nations Assembly in 1946; took a leading part in the amalgamation of the N.1.C. and the Colonial Born and Settlers Indian Assn. and the amalgamation of the N.IA. and the N.LC.; helped in the formation of the Natal Indian Organi- sation, S.A. Ind. Organisation; prominent Indian journalist in English and Tamil; chairman of the Hon. D. G. Shepstone Reception Committee; chair- man of Indian Centenary Committee; chairman of the Indian War Memorial Committee; chairman of the S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; was instrumental in build- ing the Natal Tamil Vedic Society Building in Carlisle Street at a cost of £50,000, one of the finest Indian public buildings in South Africa; played a leading part in the erection of the Indian Child Welfare Home at Sea Cow Lake at a cost of £20,000; he is the chairman of the Fund-raising Committee which has to find £60,000: by 1960 — the year of the Indian Centenary — to complete the scheme of buildings for the M. L. Sultan Technical College; recently he succeeded in getting the Natal Provincial Administra- tion to convert the Cato Manor Government-aided Indian School into a Government School — a feat by no means easy. Recreation: Lover of cricket and foot- ball. Address: Bus., 437 Smith St., Phone 24679; Res., 22 Station Rd., Durban, Phone 39264. PATHER, Ponnusamy Yogamuthu; mofr. jeweller; b. June 6, 1906, Durban; m. Soranakanthie; 4. s., 3 d.; educ. Carlisle High Grade Sch. Bus.: estd. bus. 1927, trad- ing as gen. dlr.; estd. Saraswathie Stores, 1939, and has partner- ship in Baroda Cafe. Pub. act.: Mem. Vedic T.C.; councillor Natal Tamil Vedic Soc.; chairman and vice-pres. Natal Ind. Musical Assn.; fndr. and pres. Natal Ind. Manufacturing Jewellers Assn.; repst. Jewellers to Minister of Justice in 1948-52; co-founder Siva Sathianantha Sungam, Isipingo; has travelled in In- dia. Address: 83 Brooks Rd., Durban North. PATHER, Ruthnam Sadasivan, B.A.; s. of S. R. Pather, Bar-at-Law, London; educ. Sastri College and N.U.C. Public Act.: was Pres. S.R.C.; active in Political, Cultural and Social organisations; now practising at Lakhani Chmbrs., Saville St., Durban. PATHER, Sivaram Vythialingum, company director; b, Pietermaritzburg, 1906; 3rd s. o. V. Pather; 3 s., 1d.; estd. a cinema in Johannesburg; first to introduce Indian films into the Transvaal, now contemplating erection af a luxury cinema in the Transvaal; respons- ible for the building of one floor at the Tamil School in Pageview, for the use of devotional purpose. Public activities: Trus. of the Siva Soobramoniar Temple, Melrose, Johannesburg; trus. of the Hindu Tamil Institute; pres. of the Hindu Maha Sabha Comm; has travelled extensively in Africa; takes a keen interest in the affairs of the Tamil community; has donated to the Hindu Tamil Institute, Durban and the Hindu Temple, Second River. Address: 13a 15th St.. Wrededorp, Johannesburg. PATHER, Sooboo Peethambaram, watchmaker; b. Durban, December 30, 1922; e. s. 0. L. Sooboo Pather of East London; m. Parvathee; e. d. o. L. P. Govender of Pietermaritzburg; 1 s.. 3 d.; educ. M.O.G.A.I. Sch.; later joined M. M. Pather of Cape Town; now con- ducting own business. Public activities: Takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Music. Address: Business, Room 2, 472 West St., Durban; res., 130 Umgeni Rd., Durban, Phone 63157.

---

## Page 6

172 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PATHER, Singarava- loo Ruthnum; Bar- rister-at-Law; b. Dbn., April, 1889; educ. Durban and London; qualified for the Bar at Lincoln’s Inn, 1912. Practising as solicitor in Durban. Pub. act.: One of the founders of the H.Y.M.A., 1905, which is now the Young Men's Vedic Society, of which he is vice-pres.; associated with the religious work of the South Coast Junction Temple, being first Hindu Temple built in South Africa, a gift of his father; co-secty. of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha, since its inception, 1912, and one of the secty. of the three conferences; comm. mem. of the old Natal Colonial-Born Assocn.; mem. of the Mayor's Flood Relief Comm., 1917-18; secty. of the Central Indian Flood Relief Comm., 1935. In London: In 1906-1909 member of the Comm. of London Indian Society, which was founded by the late Dadabhat Naoroji; took a leading part in all student activities; establishing the London Indian Majlis; organised the London meeting protesting against the treatment of Indians in South Africa in 1907. In Sport: Helped in the organisation of sporting bodies—Natal Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc. and the re-organisation of the South Coast District Indian F.A., which is only sports assocn. to acquire freehold grounds, due to his endeavours; was pres. N.P.I.F.A.; has been associated with practically all public movements. Publications: Edited “Dhrama Vir” (now defunct). Address: 75 Botanic Gardens Rd., Durban. PAVADAI, Doorsamy (Bob), printer; b. Johannes- burg, June 11, 1910; 6th s. 0, Poonsamy Pavadai Naidoo of Johannesburg; educ. Indian High School, Johannesburg; m. Blanche, d. o. Mrs. and the late Mr. T. S. Vassen of Johannesburg; 2 s., 3 d.; started business in 1952 under the style of Globe Printers of which he is sole prop.; one of the founders of S.A. Indian Cricket Union (TvL); one of the founders Wit- watersrand Indian Cricket Union; is hon. life vice- pres. and pres. of same for past ten years; one of the founders Inter-race Cricket Board (Tvl.); S. A. Cricket Board of Control; pres. since its formation in 1950; is hon. life vice-pres. of S.A. Indian Foot- ball Assoc., Tvl., Indian F.A., Witwatersrand Indian F.A., and Inter-race Soccer Board; repres. Tvl. at Inter-Provincial soccer tournaments; commenced career with Moonlighters F.C., 30 years ago; holds exec. positions in several bodies. Address: Bus., 177 Main Rd., Fordsburg, Phone 342251; res., 52 Commer- cial Rd., Fordsburg, Tvl. INDIAN WHO’S WHO PEERBHAI, G. H.M., businessman; b. Est- court, Sept. 28, 1912; s. 0. Peerbhay; m. Aysha, d. o. S. M. Kola of Kliptown, Jhb.; 1 d.; educ. Est- court Govt. Ind. Sch.; took over father’s bus. in 1942, Public activities: Secty. Mad- ressa Islamic Trust ‘for [4 years; elected trustee in place of father in 1955; secty./ trustee Muslim Cemetery; respons- ible for the exten. of mosque; takes inter- est in the welfare of the people. Hobbies: Sports, Address: P.O. Box 21, Phone 108, Estcourt, Natal. PEERBHAI, Rasool, b. Cape Town, January, 1907; 2nd s. of Malik Rasool formerly of Rander, Surat, Bombay, India; m. Ayesha Bibi, d. of late Hajee Yusuf Gool, 4 s., 4 d. After leaving school entered business as a commercial traveller for Messrs. L. Messaris & Co.; takes active part in Indian affairs. Address: 24 Queen’s Rd., Woodstock; bus., Phone 24385, Cape Town. PEMA, Govind; tlr. and outftr.; b. Sept. 4, 1909, Karan, Ind.; s. o. Pema Daya Mistry; educ. verna- cular in India and Higher Grade School, Durban; m. Dahie, d. of G. Lakha of Digas, India; 3 s., 2 d.; came to S.A., 1922. Bus.: Tailor and outfitter, 200 Grey St. Dbn. Pub. act.: Mem. Surat Arya Sangeet Mundial, Surat Hindu Assoc., Surat Prajapati As- soc.; Surat Educ. Soc.; interested in cultural, educational and religious matters. Recreation: Read- ing. Address: Bus., 200 Grey St., Phone 20225; Res., Flat 1, 52 Bond St., Dbn. \y % PERUMAL, Aggumbaram, b. Pmburg., 22nd Feb., 1916; s. of Aggumbaram; educ. Woodlands Indian High School. Occ.: Leather industry. (Eddels S.A. Ltd., Pmburg.); m.; 2 d. Public activities: Mem. Hill- view F.C.; mem. N.I.C., Pmburg. branch; mem. Nat. Union of Leatherworkers, Pmburg, branch; mem. Cultural Rover Crew. Rec.: Gardening and sports. Address: 33 Sanctuary Rd., Pietermaritzburg. THE SOUTH AFRICAN PETER, Shunmugam Dennis, clerk; b. Durban, June 3, 1936, y. s. of Peters; educ. St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch., Overport; commenced as junior with the firm City Bookkeeping Bureau; now their chief bookkeeper. Public activities: Mem. Progress Social Club; South Indian Music Assoc. Recreation: Music, table tennis and darts. Address: Bus., 17 Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St., Durban (ist Floor); res., 499 Brickfield Rd., Overport, Phone 62900. PETERS, Billy, trade unionist; b. Durban, February 14, 1911; e. s. o. late Thangavelu Govender; m. Meenathchee, d. o. late Muthusamy Govender; 7 s., 1 d.; educ. Cato Manor School; after leaving school was employed in several places; in 1939 travelled through London, Spain, France, Germany, Holland, Belgium, P.E.A. Public activities: Actively interested in the labour movement; was sec. of the following: Natal Plywood Workers’ Union, Natal Indian Railway Union, chairman Distributive Workers’ Union; organiser of the Brewery Workers’ Union, secty. of the D.I.M.E. Union. Recreation: Reading, journalism. Address: Bus., Room 14, Padayachees Bldg., Leopold St., Dbn.; Res., 48 Trimborne Rd., Mayville, Dbn. PHILLIPS, Paul Lionel, photographer and general dealer; b. Pmburg., 1922; 2nd s. o. Moonsamy Phillips, of Pmburg.; educ. Woodlands Indian School; m. Theresa Natalie Thompson, y, d. o. late P. Thompson; 1 s., 1 d. After leaving school was in private employment, and later opened a photographic studio; in 1954 enlarged the business into gen. dealer's. Public activities: Mem. of St. Anthony’s Soc.; was a chair. of Natal Catholic Board 1955/56, now a mem. Rec.: Billiards, photography, music. Address: P.O. Edendale, Phone 42. PILLAY, Athiemoo- lum Subramoney; re- tired mcht.; b. 1888, Thilidia Tanjore; educ. India; m. Jana- gee; d. o, S. G. Pil- lay of Madras, 1 s., 3 d. On arrival from India settled in Dor- drecht; est. bus. in partnership with brothers; conducting bakery, mineral water, drapery and gen. dirs. bus.; trading as A. Govindasamy & Co.; later moved to East London; 1911, estd. gen. dirs. bus, Pub. activities: Chairman of Hindu Protection Soc. voluntary Teacher at Tamil School; performs religious ceremonies for the local Hindu Tamil comm.; last sur- viving foundation mem. of Hindu Protection Soc. to witness the completion of the Temple building; solely responsible for the formation of the Hindu Women's Assoc., a body formed to help raise funds for the cause of the upliftment of the Hindu comm. in East London; is life trus. of this body. Recreation: Read- ing. Address: 51 St. Pauls Rd., East London, Phone 3662. F2 INDIAN WHO’S WHO 173 PILLAY, Baikum Moorgas, b. Pmb., May 21, 1931; s. o. Baikum Pillay. Occ.: clerk; educ. Wood- lands Ind. High Sch. and Sastri College; m.; 1 s., 2 d. Pub. act.: Secretary Tech. F.C., 1953/4/5; secretary M.D.1.F.A. 1956/7; vice-pres. Tech. F.C.; mem. Aryan B. Soc.; mem. N.LY. Congress (Pmburg, branch); member Natal Alum- infum Workers’ Union; mem. Wood- lands O.B. Club; exec. mem. N.I.F.A.; exec. mem. N.I.R.A.; mem. M.D. L.F.A.; coun. M.D.I.F.A. Recreation: Sports, Address: 9 Lower Boom Street, Pietermaritzburg. PILLAY, Bala Subramanian, Hindu Priest; b. Madras, 1880; e. s. o. P. Pillay; educ. India; m. Angelamal, d. of N. Pillay of Port Elizabeth; 1 s.; left India, 1904, for Bulawayo; after passing educ. test. was allowed to enter Union of $.A.; estd. bus, in Steynsburg; came to Port Elizabeth, 1920; estd. gen.- dlrs. bus.; conducts religious services for the Tamil comm. in Port Eliza- beth; estd. Tamil school 1929-36 and taught at same school; was asked by the Tamil comm. of Port Elizabeth to conduct the religious work in that city on a full-time basis. Recreation: Reading. Address: 103 Willow Rd., Fairview, Port Elizabeth. PILLAY, Coomarasamy N., M.B., B.Ch., medical practitioner; b. Durban. Add.: Surgery, 27 Matheran Rd., Avoca, Durban, Phone 83-5884; res., 316 Park Station Rd., Durban, Phone 83-4803, PILLAY, Comara- samy Ganesa (Milo), b. Queenstown, C.P., Aug. 8, 1911; 3rd s. of late V. Comara- samy; educ. Steyns- burg, C.P.; m. Chris- sie Barendse, Graaftf- Reinet, 1 s.. 3 d. In private employment; started weight-lifting at the age of 9; from 1928-32 held S.A. Strongest Youth title; won S.A. national weight-lifting cham- pionships, 1933-34; runner-up, 1935; won 1936 S.A. Olympic Games weight-lifting trials; one and only non-Euro- pean Springbok weight-lifter; the architect of the iron sport in S.A.; founded the E.P. Weight-lifting Assn. in 1930 and S.A. Weight-lifting Federation in 1933; was asst. sec. and technical adviser to the Federation; since 1929 has trained nearly 8,000 men and women

---

## Page 7

174 THE SOUTH AFRICAN of all nationalities; during Second World War trained over 300 men of the S.A. Air Force; he was instru- mental in the formation of the British Empire Weight- lifting Federation in 1948; two of his pupils, Ronnie Eland and Cecil February, competed overseas in weight-lifting and wrestling, respectively; he gained world-wide reputation and fame for his fine physique and great strength; has been the admiration and inspiration to all weight-lifters and body-builders in Southern Africa. Address: P.O. Box 497, Port Eliza- beth, PILLAY, Govinder Rajoo, gen. merchant; b. 1916, East London; 2nd s. o. S. G. Pillay of East London; educ. St. Johns Sch., East London: m. Daya, d. o. S. A. Pillay of Durban; | s.3 was assoc. with mother’s bus.; trading as Ave. Fruiterers; on death of mother took over sole control, 1939; trading under the style of “Reggies,” at 4 Amalinda Rd., East London; foundation mem. Merchants F.C.: hon. life vice-pres. of same; delegate to S.A. Soccer Board at Durban, 1943; secty. Hindu Temple, East London. Recreation: Motoring. Address: 4 Amalinda Rd., East London, Phone 4714; res., Phone 6739. PILLAY, -Ken, fresh produce dealer and com. agt.;_ b. Johan- nesburg, 1917;<s. 0. t..P: Pilay:) m Doreen, d. o. T. S. Vasan; I s., 1 d.; was originally assoc. with Messrs. G. E. Taylor and South African Produce Distributors; estd. own bus. in, 1955, trading as Universal Farm Produce Dis- tributors. Pub. act.: Was comm. mem. of the Transvaal I.F.A. and Sports Board; was secty. and treas. of the Wits I.F.A.; rep. Transvaal in Indian Soccer Tournament in 1937; capt. Transvaal Indian team in 1941, 1943, 1945; capt. Transvaal Indian teams in inter-race matches; also served as sports administrator; Recreation: Tennis. Address: 55 High St., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, P.O. Box 4608, Phone 236806. INDIAN WHO’S WHO PILLAY, Fred Arnajalem, b. 1911. Public activities: Played soccer for Majestic F.C. and Central F.C.; was hon. rec. clerk and hon. secty. and treas. for Durban Liquor and Catering F.A.; secty., treas. and later pres. of Catering Tennis Assoc.; hon. life vice-pres. of same; was treas. S.A. Indian Refs. Assoc, now sec.; hon. rec. clerk of Mayville D.J.F.A. 1954-55; now hon. rec. clerk of Natal Indian Federal Assoc. Address: c/o Durban Club, Durban. PILLAY, Kistansamy Coomarasamy, b. Durban, Nov. 26, 1897; e. s. of late Mr. and Mrs. K. K. Pil- lay of Greenwood Park; m. Amurthamal, d. of Arumugam Moodliar of Mt. Edgecombe; 5 s., 5 d.; educ. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Dbn. Was connected with his father in bus., trading as K. K. Pil- lay & Sons, gen. mehts., until his re- tirement. Pub. act.: Trus. Shri Vathia- nantha Esperar Temple, Durban; trus. Greenwood Park Runganatha Temple; trus. Greenwood Park Govt.-aided Indian School; trus. Krishna Sentamil Soc.; grantee Briardene Govt.-aided Indian school: chair. Krishna Welfare Soc.; vice-pres, Natal Tamil Vedic Soc.; and holds office in many other organisa- tions; visited Indian in 1925, 1948 and 1954. Rec., gardening and sport. Address: 316 Park Station Rd.. Phone 834803, Greenwood Park, Natal. PILLAY, Kistansamy Shunmoogam, retired businessman; b. Greenwood Park, Dbn., July 30, 1903; 3rd _s. of late K. K. Pillay; m. Meenachee, d. of Namasaivayam Pillay, late of Molteno, C.P.; 4 s., two d.; educ. Car- lisle St. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Dbn.; after leaving sch. joined his father in bus. (K. , Pillay & Sons), in\4918; estd. Premier Trunk Works in 1943. Public activities: Trus, Coronation Sentamil Soc.; chairman, Finance Comm. of the Shri Vathianantha Esperar Temple (Umgeni Rd.); trus. Greenwood Park Indian Sch. and Temple comm.; grantee, Greenwood Park Indian Platoon School; was responsible for the THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 175 estab. of Greenwood Park Govt.-aided Indian School and donor of “Pillay Block” of this school; visited India twice—in 1952 and 1953—with his wife and party of friends; met the Indian Prime Minister, Pundit Nehru, and Shri Rajagopalachari; has gone on hunting expeditions in Zululand, Portuguese East Africa and British East Africa; was keenly interested in cricket and tennis. Recreation: Fishing and motor- boating. Address: 325 Park Station Rd., Greenwood Park, Durban, Natal, Phone 833666. PILLAY, Kistansamy Vadivelu, retired businessman; b. Durban, July 8, 1900; 2nd. s. of late Mr. and Mrs. K. K, Pillay; m. Savabakium, e. d. of Mr. Chinsamy Moodley of Howick; 4 s., 3 d.; educ. Umgeni and Carlisle St. Govt.-aided Indian Schools, Durban; joined father’s butchery and general dealers’ buiness in 1918 at Briardene; retd. in 1954. Public activities: Was chairman, now life vice-pres., Coronation Krishna Welfare Soc. (Briardene); patron Briardene Indian Social Club; patron Parkhill Tennis Club; chairman Greenwood Park School and Temple Comm.; chairman Greenwood Park Sentamil Soc.; was in sole charge for 22 years until his retirement in 1954 of Briardene Indian Post Office; visited India with family in 1953 and met, among other notables, Pundit Nehru and Sri Rajagopalachari. Recreation: Hunting and angling. Address: 311 Park Station Rd., Greenwood Park, Durban, Natal, Phone 835217. PILLAY, M. D., b. Pmburg., 1900. Occ.: Insur. repres.; s. o. M. Pillay; educated St. Anthony’s School; m.; 4s, 5 d. Bus.: Rep. for the African Life Assur. Soc, Ltd. Pub. act.: Hon. life vice- pres. and foundation mem. and patron of N.ILL.T.A.; also served on the selec- tion comm; founda- tion mem. of Mid- lands Ind. L.T.A.; was keen soccer player and during the years 1921 to 1951 was a member of the Royals F.C. and held the following positions: capt., manager, pres., hon. life vice-pres. and record clerk of the M.D.I.F.A.; also hon. life vice- pres. of the N.J.F.A.; foundation mem. of Pmb. Inter-race Soccer Board; was pres. of the N.I. Ref. Assoc.; from 1935/7 was secty./treas. of the M.I.S.A.; hon. life vice-pres. Royals C.C.; vice-pres. and delegate to N.I.C.U.; vice-pres. of M.D.LC.U.; hon. secty./treas. N.ILC.U.; delegate to S.ALCU. Am- bulance Officer of St. John’s Ambulance Brigade (Overseas), Natal Dist., Ist Pmb. Indian Division; mem. H.Y.M.A. Recreation: Gardening. Address: 481 Boom St., Pietermaritzburg. PILLAY, Muthoo Chinsamy (Dennis), general dealer and restaurant keeper; b. Springs, Tvl., April 13, 1921; s.o. Muthoo Pillay; educ. Springs Coloured Govt. Sch.; m. Kistamah, d. of Govindsamy Chetty; 3 s., 3 d. Business: Kays Restaurant, est. 1952. Public activi- ties: Official, Melrose Hindu Temple Com- mittee; founder and organiser of Sara- seathi Orchestra, Jhb. Band, in 1939; was band leader till 1951; plays violin, clarinet, flute, thabla, accordeon, harmonium, tenor banjo. A keen sportsman; played football for Vredons A in 1938, Dravidians in 1938 and capt. for four years; repr. Wits. F.A. Assn. in several provincial matches; S. Transvaal Hotel Employers’ F. Assn. in the Cavalla Cup Tournament in Durban in 1947; played cricket for the Zulfika C.C. for five years. Address: 74 Bree Street, Newtown, Phone 33-6689, Johannesburg. PILLAY, Nades, caterer; b. 1922, East London; 2nd sg, o. late P. Pillay of East Lon- don; educ. John Bes- seker Sch.; m. Dolly; d. o. A. Pillay, Dbn.; 1 s., 3d.; played for Prides of India F.C.; secty. Prides F.C., 1936-39; treas. Prides F.C., 1939-57; jt. sec. Border F.A., 1951; hon. sec. Border F.A., 1952-56; vice-pres. Border F.A., 1957-58: delegate to Quad- rangular F.A. at Cape Town; treas, Tamil School Board, 1949-51; secty. East London Liquor and Catering Trade Employees’ Union; vice~ pres. of same in 1954; treas. E.L. Hindu Pro- tection Soc., 1947; asst. sec. in 1958; rep. Border in 1943-49 at Provincial matches; manager Border Ind. F.A. at Durban, 1955, for Sam China Tourna- ment; record clerk Border F.A., 1952-53. Recreation: Sport. Address: 21 Victoria Rd., East London.

---

## Page 8

176 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PILLAY, Nadasen Shunmugam, general merchant; b. April 16, 1928; s. o. late V. N. Pillay of Grahams- town; m. Chandrapra- gash; 2nd d. o. late Mr. and Mrs. R. M. Naidoo of Durban. Bus.: Was assoc. with late father in a bus. which was estd. by his grandfather; on death of father continued to conduct bus. in part- nership with mother; one of the leading drapery and outfitting business in the Eastern Province. Public activities: Was mem. of Grahamstown Lawn Tennis Club; mem. British Indian Assoc. Recreation: Motoring and fish- ing. Add.: 23-25 High St., Grahamstown, Phone 90. Tel. Add. “Pilladay.” PILLAY, Pakkiri Pakkiry, mng. direc- tor of Pakco (Pty.), Ltd.; b. April 1, 1903, Tongaat, Natal; e. s. of Pakkiry Pillay; educ. Clairwood Ind. School and Higher Grade Sch., Durban; m. Kaveri, 3rd d. of Subraya Moodley, Clare Estate, Durban; 1s, 1 d. Business: Mng. director, Pakco (Pty.), Ltd., est. 1949, Verulam; employed in various European food manuf. factories, including Messrs. Crossbie-Lowens; Pakco is a firm of food manufac- turers and millers, specialising in jams, chutneys, sauces, pickles, syrups, squashes and spices; the fac- tory is ideally situated and its products are well known throughout South Africa with a reputation for sound quality. Recreation: Football and fishing. Club: Pirates Angling Club. Address: Bus., Phone 118, Box 65, Verulam, Natal; Res., 11 Groom Street, Verulam. PILLAY, Paul, magician; b. Durban, 1919; e. s. of late K. N. Pillay of Durban; educ. at Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School; m. Nurse Catherine; d. of Mrs. Rosa Beukes of Cape Town; 3 s., 1 d.; after Jeaving school was in private employment; interested in magic since childhood; was employed by several leading hotels in the Cape as a wine steward; organ- ised many shows for charity; was a mem. of the Western Province F.C. Recreation: Reading. Address: 29 Galway Road, Mayville, Durban, Phone 88349. INDIAN WHO’S WHO PILLAY, Perumal (Perry), teacher; b. Johannesburg, February 3, 1911; s. of T. P. Solomon Pillay; educ. Johannesburg Eurafrican Centre; m. Lorraine; 1 s., 1 d. Public activities: Among the first members of the Indian Scout Movement in S.A.; one of the founders of the T.I. Teachers’ Assoc.; secty. Wit- watersrand I.F.A., T.J.L.T. Assoc., S.A.I.L.T. Assoc.; pres. Moonlighters’ F.C. for seven years; pres. of Johannesburg and Transvaal TB. Soc.; played tennis for Criterion T.C.; founder T. Primary Schools’ Sports Assoc. and Wits High School Sports Assoc. for Coloureds and Indians; administrator for cricket, football and tennis. Address: 15la Market St., Johan- nesburg. PILLAY, Puckree Govindasamy (Pons- ford), leatherworker; b. Pmburg.; s. o. Puckree Pillay; educ. Woodlands Ind. High Sch.; 3 s., 1 d. Pub. act. Started soccer for Higher Grade Schools F.C. in 1932- 1935; rep. M.D.LF.A. 1932/35; capt. M.D.- LF.A. Juveniles 1935; played for Y.N.F.C., 1936/37; rep. M.D.- I.F.A. juniors 1936/ 37; played for un- | beaten Natal cham- pions in 1938, the Y.N.F.C., 1939/1940 played Y.C.F.C.; 1941/1946 played for Yorks F.C.; 1947 to 153 played for Y.C.F.C.; repres. Natal in 1939 and 1941 in Sam China Cup; repres. S.A.I.F.A. in 1939 against S.A. Coloureds, captained side at centre-half position; holds numerous cups and holds distinctions of cap- taining many victorious intertown teams and five-a- side teams; playing mem. Royals C.C. since 1932; has repres. dist. in intertown matches; played for H.G. Schools C.C. for five years; presently holds position of secty./treas. for Royals C.C.; vice-pres. M.D.LC.U. 1956/7/8; was on Selection Comm. in both soccer and cricket; captained Midlands in All India Soccer tournament, 1942; played for County intertown many occasions; playing mem. of Pentrich Schools. Rec.: Gardening and sports. Address: 12 James St., Pieter- maritzburg. \ PILLAY, Rookoomani, nurse; b. “Pretoria, February 21, 1937; 2nd d. of C. Pillay of Pretoria; educ. Pretoria Indian Goverment School (J.C. 1953); took up nursing at the Pretoria General Hospital; later transferred to St. Aidan’s Hospital, Durban. Hobby: Knitting. Add.: St. Aidan’s Hospital, Durban; Res., P.O. Box 99, Pretoria, Phone 28148. THE SOUTH AFRICAN PILLAY, Ramakristan Govindsamy; butcher, boxing prom., physical culture instr. and com. agent; b. Oct. 28, 1918, Durban; s. of Rama- kristan Pillay; educ. Umgeni Govt. School; m. Dhanalutchmee, e. d. of S. M. Naidoo, Durban; 3d. Business: Butchery, est. 1948, Ind. Market, Durban. Took up phys. culture training 1932; transp. driver when war broke out in 1939 and went to Kenya, Uganda, Abyssinia and Eritrea; entered Egypt and served with the Eighth Army Forces of the Western Desert and Asia Minor, return- ing in 1944. 1945, won featherweight title for weight- lifting in Natal; 1946, won lightweight title in Natal; 1946, competed for S.A. Weightlifting Championship in P.B.; was a runner-up in the featherweight div.; 1948, opened Jackie Pillay’s Weightlifting and Physi- cal Culture Academy. Public activities: Mem. Rama- krishna Centre of S.A.; soccer referee. Address: Res., Phone 29205, Flat 10, 33 Carlisle Street, Durban. PILLAY, Ruthina- samy Govindasamy, R. M. Pillay; educ. B.A. S.A. M.Ed. (Ntl.), T2 (N.E.D.); principal; b. Durban, March 27, 1915; s. o. R. MM. Pillay; - m. Thunam Moodley, ex- staff Roosfontein Ind. Sch.; 3 $.;_ started teaching in 1930, at Merebank Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and also taught at Isipingo, ; jun. and Sen. Noi bn oN wood Boys’ Sch.; in “) the year 1951, was appointed principal of the Illovo Government-aided Indian School. Public activities: Deputy Divisional Commissioner for Indian Boy Scouts in Natal; pres. of the South Coast Indian School Sports Assoc.; was pres. of the Natal Indian School F.A. for two years; ex-chairman of the Clair- wood branch of N.I.T.S.; served since 1946 on the headquarters executive of the N.I.T.S.; in the year 1949, was chairman of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Comm.; during World War II, was Unit Commander of the Medical Ambulance Brigade, Clairwood Div.; foundation mem. and secty. of the Inter-District Ind. Cricket Union: vice-pres. of the S.C.D.ILCU., S.C.D.ILF.A.; was formerly school manager and inspector of Clairwood Tamil Inst.; was chairman of the non-European Students’ Union of the N.U.C.; INDIAN WHO’S WHO 177 repres. N.U.C. non-European Students’ at. the N.ULS.A.S. conference held at the Witwatersrand University in 1956; appointed C.O. for Durban in 1951; received Medal of Merit from the Governor- General, G. Brand van Zyl, for distinguished service to Scouting; foundation mem. of the Clairwood Literary and Debating Soc. and was also its pres.; ex-pres. of the Clairwood School Old Boys’ Club; patron of the Orient Social Club, Recreation: Tennis. Address: 44 Horse Shoe Rd., Clairwood, Durban, Phone 819170. PILLAY, Ramsami Chinsami, bookkeeper and land and estate agent; b. Dbn., 1906; s. of Ramsami Pillay; educ. Umgeni and Verulam Schools; 7 s.. 7 d. Business: Was associated with Parsee Rustomjee in Durban; later estab, land and est. agency in Pieter- maritzburg; also con- ducted gen. dealer's bus. Public activities: Mem. of N.I.C. (Pmb. branch); patron and pres. Indian Young Men’s Club; trus. and pres. of H.Y.M.A.; sec. and auditor Marieamman Temple, foundation mem. Young Colonials F.C.; foundation mem. of Pietermaritzburg Arya Samaj; secty. Pietermaritzburg Ratepayers’ Assoc.; mem. Swami Nischalanda Recreation Comm.; former boxing promoter. Recreation: Music and boxing; Address: 395 Boom St., Pietermaritzburg. Address: Bus., 450 Church St., Pietermaritzburg. PILLAY, Rungasamy Gopaul, sec./mngr.; b. Dbn., Sept. 5, 1925; 5th s. o. Rungasamy Pillay; m. Salachie, d. of Puckria Pillay; 1 s. educ. Stella Hill Sch. Private Study (Sec.); commenced work as clerk; completed matric. in 1944; took up an appointment as Accountant at a co- op. store in 1948: ap- pointed as_ secty./ mner. in 1949, Pub. act.: Ex-mem. N.I.C.; chairman Merebank branch of N.LC.; co- ordinating comm. on housing for Merebank and Wentworth areas; patron of various sporting bodies. ener Bus., 50 Begonia Rd., Merebank, Phone 7501.

---

## Page 9

178 THE SOUTH AFRICAN PILLAY, S. S., insur- ance and general agt.; b. Durban, 1921; s. o Soobramonian Pillay; educ. matriculated at Sastri College; m. Dhanalutchmee, d. of M. N. Pillay of Ladysmith; | s., 1 d.; rep. of the Sun Life of Canada Insur. Co. and the Scottish Union and National Insurance. Pub. act.: Hon. life vice-pres. of the Clairwood School Old Boys Club; also ex-pres. and secty. of this club; chairman of the S.C. & D.N.E.A.A. for four years; secty. for the Mutual Benefit Soc. for nine years. Recreation: Sport. Address: 50 Jacobs Rd., Clairwood, Durban. PILLAY, Saitappa Nadasa, general dealer; b. Ross- burgh, 1908; 2nd. s. of Sailappa Pillay of South India; m. Lutchmee, sister of V. M. Pillay of New- castle; 3 s., 4 d.; educ. Umzinto Govt.-aided School; worked at Sezela and Esperanza Sugar Mills for Reynolds Bros.; came to Durban in 1926 to start cartage bus.; visited India in 1936; estab. gen. dlrs. bus. in Jacobs Rd., under the style of S. N. Pillay. Public activities: Patron of Merebank Parents’ Assoc.; was mem. of Merebank Ratepayers’ Assoc. and mem. of Merebank School Board; treas. Jacobs Welfare Soc. Address: Bus., 377 Chamberlain Rd., Jacobs, Phones 87659 and 87664. PILLAY, Selvum Vengetes, garage pro- prietor; b. Hatting- spruit, Natal, April 3, 1921; o s. oO Vengetes Pillay; educ. Clairwood Gvt.-Aided Sch. and M. L. Sultan Technical College; m. e. d. of C. M. Moodley, of Port Shepstone; 1] s., 2 d. Business: Goodwill Garage, est. 1954, specialising in trim- ming, panel beating and spray painting; an expert in motor Bi engineering & repair specialists; also a coach builder; before opening present business was a tea-room proprietor for eight years. Public activities: Chairman and foundation mem. Orient Social Club; ch. and founder of the Comet Cricket Club (Clairwood); mem. Durban In- dian Child Wel. Society. A very keen cricketer and deeply interested in social and religious activities. His father, Mr. Vengetes Pillay, who is now in retirement, served in the S.A.P. and the Natal Mounted Rifles INDIAN WHO’S WHO for over 30 years, and is also one of the oldest residents of Clairwood. Recreations: Cricket and table tennis. Club: Comet Cricket Club. Address: Bus., 86 Pine Road, Clairwood, Phone 818834; Res., 25 Shabally Road, Clairwood, Phone 819214. PILLAY, Shunmugam Govindsamy (Loggie), clerk; b. 1930, Pieter- maritzburg; s. o. late A. G. Pillay; educ. E.P.S. Sch. Pub. act.: Was employed by Ed- dels, Natal Witness, Risley & Co. as clerk; mem. F.O.S.A.: secty. 1954-57; joined Pmb. County LF.A., 1942; later served as exec. mem. and councillor; vice-pres. and treas.; fndr. E.P.S. Old Boys’ C. Club; served as pres., capt., vice-pres., Royals F.C., 1955-58; mem. Young Natalian F.C.; delegate to County I.FA.. for E.P.S. Old Boys’ F.C.; delegate for M.D.I.F.A. and Northern Natal F.A.; vice-pres. Frontiers F.C.; mem. F.O.S.A., subsequently secty. until 1957. Add.: 67 Glen Rd., Pentrich, Pietermaritzburg. PILLAY, Sidney Manicum; market and commission agent; s. of Manikum Pillay; b. Boksburg, on Dec. 25, 1923; educ. Eurafrican Govt. School, Springs; m. Doreen, d. of Freddy Masher; trading as Manickum’s Fresh Produce. Public activities: Pres. Bakerton Ind. Peoples’ Council; exec. mem. Springs Tamil Inst.; pres. Eastern Dist. Ind. F. Assn.; pres. Villas F.C.; mem. T.I.F. Assn.; helped to start Springs Indian Govt. School. Address: Stand 1666, Bakerton, Tvl. PILLAY, Socklingam Pathari, trade union secretary; b. Durban, 1918; s. o. P. Pillay; educ. Stella Hull Govt.-aided Indian School; m. Thanabakium, y. d. of late M. Naicker of Umzinto; 1 s., 1 d.; on leaving school entered the building trade; later became estate agent; now secty. for trade union; secty, Laundry— Dry Cleaning and Dyeing Employees’ Union, Natal; secty. of the Manufacturers Workers’ Union, Natal: hon. life’ vice-pres. County Ind. F.A.; mem. of the Durban Indian Child Welfare Soc.; keenly interested in matters pertaining to the industrial workers. Rec.: Soccer and reading. Address: Bus., 36 Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 27324; res., 116 Hawthorn Ave., Bellair, Durban. PILLAY (Somny) Vedi, merchalif: b. at Verulam, 1926; s. of Vedi K. Pillay of “Stanger; educ. at Stanger Govt.-aided Indian School. Bus.: Estd. own bus. on leaving school, trading as Pillay’s Mattress Service; executes Govt. ‘contracts for hospitals. Public activities: Mem. Deepavali Sports Club, Merebank: mem. of the North Coast F.A.; mem. of the Shri Murga Temple, Jacobs Rd. Recreation: Sports. Add.: Res., 54 Carinthia Rd., Springfield, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN PILLAY, Sundragasen (Sundra), accountant and auditor with F.I.B.A.; b. Durban, June 25, 1907; s. of R. S. C. Pillay presently of Johannesburg: educ. Johannesburg and Pretoria; m. Muniahmah Goonam, d. of late Nynah Moodley of Durban; 2 s., 1 d; conducting accountancy business. Address: “Hearth- dale,” Belgravia Rd., Crawford, Capetown, Phone 695708. PILLAY, Sunny, b. Pmburg., 1917; e. s. of S. B. Pillay, of Pmburg.; educ. St. Anthony’s, Woodlands High School and Sastri College; m. L. A. Naidoo, of Durban; 2 s., 2 d. Public activities: Exec. mem, Nat. Leather Workers’ Union; employed at Eddels as shop steward; was mem. N.I.C.; one of the founders of Magnus Rover Crew, 1936; delegate to Pmb. County I.F.A. 1937; founder Pmburg County Indian Referees’ Assn, 1938; treas. County I.F.A, 1943; hon. life vice- pres. of Pmburg. C. Indian F.A.; delegate to N.IL.F.A.; played soccer for United F.C.; played in inter-district matches; mem. Divine Life Soc. and Red Cross Soc.; holds several certificates; mem. Blood Transfusion Service and was vice-pres Tamil Protective Assoc., subsequently treas., 1946. Address: 102 Topham Rd,, Pentrich, Pietermaritzburg. PILLAY, Thirvanga- dam Shunmugam; printer; b. Durban, Natal, April 26, 1898; s. of Thirvangadam Pillay; m. Govinda- mah, e. d. of Mr. Rajoo Govinder, of Greenwood Pk., Natal; 8 s., 2 d.; educ. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Dur- ban. Business: Prop. Luxmi Vilas Press, est. in 1926; after being a storeman and inspec- tor, Revenue Office (Asiatic Section), Dur- ban. Public activities: Ex-pres. Young Men’s Vedic Soc., now amalgamated with the Natal Tamil Vedic Soc., of which he is pres. and hon. life vice- pres.; ex-sec. Indian Soc. Service Comm., 1935-43; chairman. Hindu Tamil Inst. School Board; patron of several cultural, educational and spiritual societies; interested in the Thirukootam Services at the Vythian- athar Esparar Temple, Durban; publisher of three Tamil prayer books for free distribution. Recreation: Reading. Address: Bus., 88c Victoria St., Phone 21251; Res., 1 Carters Avenue, Phone 49127, Durban. POODHUN, Lambert David, clergyman; b. Pieter- maritzburg, 1930; s. of H. S. Poodhun; educ. B.A. (Natal), Teachers’ Senior Certificate; assist. priest of St. Aidans Missions; trained at St. Augustine's Col- lege, Canterbury, England, and Edinburgh, 1953-56; priest at St. Michaels, Rossburgh, Natal; mem. Natal Indian Blind Soc. and Durban Indian Child Welfare; interested in social studies. Recreation: Photography, sport. Address: 12! Roslyn Ave., Overport, Durbn. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 179 PILLAY, Valaythum Sundram, b, Pmburg., 1916; s. of A. V. Pil- Jay, of Pmburg.; educ. E.P.S. Sch., Pmburg.; m. Murugaye, y. d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Palund; 2 s., 3 d.; was in employ of Pmburg. Cold Storage, 1928- 1947; now transport driver for Eddels. Public activities: repr. Pmburg. County F.C. and Pmburg. District, 1954; also Natal at East London 1937, and Sam China Tour- nament 1937-53; repr. S.A. at Lourenco Marques 1957, and Young Natalians 1932-57; was subseauently manager; selector for senior division; secty. N.I.F.A., 1943; manager inter- town team at East London and Durban. Address: 102 Campsdrift Rd., Pentrich, Pietermaritzburg. PONNSAMY, Subra- money; jeweller; e. s. of Ponnsamy; b. Dur- ban, 1917;.educ. Clair- wood Govt. Aided School; m. Meenatchi, 2nd d. of N. Naidoo, of Durban; 3 s., 3 d. Business: Pyramid Jewellers & Pawnbro- kers, est. 1939; regis- tered firm; Clairwood’s leading and modern jewellers; served the firm Eastern Jewellers, Durban, after leaving school. Played soccer and cricket; m. Black- pool F.C. Address: Bus., 536 South Coast Road, Chirwood: Res., 105 Pine Road, Rossburgh, Natal. POONEN, Murugas, b. Stanger, November 4, 1934; e. s. of late O. Poonen of Stanger; educ. Stanger Indian High School, J.C. in 1953; employed at King Edward VIII Hospital. Public activities: Mem. of Musical Orchestra. Recreation: Music, soccer, cricket, swimming. Address: King Edward VIII Hospital; Res., 57 Roslyn Ave., Springfield, Durban.

---

## Page 10

Ne EEE Ee 180 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 181 POONAN, Anthony Rungasamy, cutter, clothing industry; s. of C. Poonan; b. Jo- hannesburg, Jan. 27, 1921; educ. Johannes- burg Ind. Govt. Sch.; m., 6 ch. Public activi- ties: Mem. Garment Workers’ Union, act- ive in its administra- tion as a mem. of the exec. for the past 15 years; mem. S.A. Inst. of Race Relations. Sporting activities: Founder & pres. Cor- wa inthians C.C., Germis- 2 ton; deleg. to Eastern T.L. and Col. C. Union. Address: 1076 3rd Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston. POONEY, Rampar- sad, undertaker; b. SJhburg., 1904; s. o. Pooney; educ. Ger- miston Col. Govt. Sch.; m. Manchee, d. of K. Pema; 3 s., 5 d.; estd. undertakers bus. in 1944; opened branch. at Newclare later.“ Pub. activities: comm. mem. of the Sanathan V.DS.; played soccer for the Hindu United F.C. and Shamrocks F.C.; takes an active part in the social and political affairs of the Indian community; first Indian to estb. an undertaker’s bus. in Transvaal: provides free burial’ to the poor; particularly interested in education. Address: 20 Bertha St., Sophiatown, Johannesburg. POONASAMY, Kolantha Velloo, gen. dir.; b. 1917, East London; y. s. o. late C. Poonasamy; educ. St. Johns Rd. Sch. and Lovedale; m. Letchemie, e. d. of S. Naidoo of Port Eliza- beth; 2 s., 1 di; on leaving sch. was assoc. with father’s business; estd. own bus. in 1957; trading as Crown Fruiterers. Pub. act.: Played soc- cer for Merchants C; was pres. Stars F.C.; pres. Frontier F.A.; was pres. S.A.LF.A., 1947-49; was secty. East London Indian Assoc. during the war years: was also re- sponsible for non-European Toch H during war years and was secty.; was pres. East London Tamil School Board; now sec. of Hindu Religious Protective Soc.; only registered Indian racehorse owner in S.A. from 1936; mem. East London Indian Assoc.; assisted in raising funds for Temple. Address: 32 St. Johns Rd., East London. POONSAMY, _ Dick, bookkeeper, Local Health Commission; b. Pmburg, Oct. 26, 1928; educ. Esther Payne Smiths Indian School and Wood- Jands Ind. High Sch.; 1s, 2 d. Pub. act.: Secty. N.LF.A., 1957/ 58; secty. County LF.A., 1951/56 coun. M.C.LF.A., 1947/50; coun, N.LF.A., 1953/ 56; secty. Frontier F.C., 1949/50; treas. Frontier F. C., 1947/ 48; vice-pres. Frontier F.C., 1951/7; vice- pres. M.C.I. Ref. Assoc. 1955/57; secty. F.O.S.A. fund raising comm., Pentrich branch, 1948/49; auditor Frontier F.C., 1955/57; treas. M.C.LF.A., 1957: founder Frontier F.C., 1947. Recreation: sport and social activities. Address: 58 Glynn Rd., Pieter- maritzburg. POOVAN, James Dominic, b. East Lon- don, 1919; s. o. late M. Poovan; educ. Kingwilliamstown; m. Daphne, d. o. late Mr. and Mrs. Esben of Kingwilliamstown; 2 s. 3 d. Bus.: estd. Muslim Butchery also conducts taxi bus. Pub. act.: Treas. S.A. F.A. Board, 1947; treas, B.J.F.A.; first chairman Table Ten- nis Union, East Lon- don; chairman Quoits Union, East London; ce and fndr. Ind. rugby club; capt. City Rugby Glut: repres. East London Coloured rugby and was manager on several occasions; manager Border I.F.A., which won Mannie Sam Trophy, 1952; was manager B.LF:A. in inter- race, 1957; selector for B.I.F.A. for last 15 years also chairman; chairman Prides I.F.C. for last 10 years; was capt. for 5 years; foundation mem. and treas., 5 years, Swaraj Tennis Club; delegate to Cape Quad. S.I.F.A. S.A. Board and local Inter-race Board; chairman B.I.F.A. Entertainment Comm. 2 THE B. PURMASIR FAMILY & ship Trust (1939). PURMASIR, late Dhanwanti; b. Mooi River, Natal, 1890; died March 11, 1953; 3rd d. of late Mr. Beharie Maharaj of Ladysmith; m. B. Purmasir on Jan. 3, 1903; 8 s. 5 d. Pub. act.: Was member Ind. Women’s Assn.; Indian Women’s Reading Circle; president Durban Women’s Arya Samaj. PURMASIR, Sukhdeva; director of companies; b. Durban, Dec. 12, 1908; e.s. of Mr. B. Purmasir of Durban; m. Gourie (Premvati), y. d. of late Mr. R. Gosai Maharaj of Maritzburg; 3 s., 5 d.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch., Durban, and Natal Tech. College. After leaving sch. was admitted as partner in father’s business of Durban Electric Mineral Water Works (Pty.), Ltd.; S.A. Sweet Manu- facturing Co. (Pty.), Ltd.; manager of Sharma & Co., estate agents. Pub. act.: Secty. Durban Arya Samaj; treas. Hindi Shiksha Sangh (S.A.); comm, mem. Arya Prithindhi Sabha (S.A.); mem. International University Soc. Rec.: Music and tennis. Address: Bus., 17-19 May St., Phone 23675, Durban; Res., 70 Mons Rd., Phone 818020, Beltair, Natal. PURMASIR, late Omeila; b. Durban, Jan. 14, 1925; died Dec. 23, 1955; e. d. of Mr. T. Ramluckan, of Durban; m. Lakrajh Purmasir, 2nd s, of Mr. B. Purmasir of Durban; | s., 2 d.; educ. Sydenham Ind. Girls’ Sch. Pub. act.: Was mem. of Durban Arya Samaj and Durban Central Women’s Tennis Club. PURMASIR, Blackie; b. Durban, 1878; y. s. of Blackie Ram Choudri; m. 3rd d. of Beharee Maharaj, late of Ladysmith; 8 s., 5 d.; educ. Boys’ Model and Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch. After leaving school was connected with brother’s firm of Dookhan Bros., Greyville Mineral Water Works; in 1921 started own business of Durban Electric Mineral Works (Pty.), Ltd., admitting his sons as partners, also director of S.A. Sweet Manufacturing Co. (Pty.), Ltd., 507 Umgeni Rd., Phone 37467, Durban; is also a property owner. Pub. act.: Member of the N.LC.; member of Indian Hospital Advisory Board; vice-pres. Durban Arya Samaj; patron Hindi Shiksha Sangh (S.A.);\ chairman, Liberty Building Society; president Arya Prathinidhi Sabha of S.A. Donated class- room at M. L. Sultan Tech. College. Mem- ber of Durban International Club. Share- holder of the Arya Sahitya Mundal, Ltd., Ajmere, Trustee Gandhi-Tagore Lecture- Visited India in 1933 and met prominent leaders, and again in 1953, also visited Mauritius. Add.: Bus., 17-19 May St., Phone 23675, Durban; Res., 56 Mons Rd., Phone 818772, Bellair, Natal. PURMASIR, Lakrajh; managing director of com- panies; b. Durban, Jan. 15, 1911; 2nd s. of B. Pur- masir of Durban; m. Kalaispathi (Omeila), d. of late T. Ramluckan of Durban; | s., 2 d.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch. and Sastri College, Durban. After leaving college was admitted as partner in father’s business of Durban Electric Mineral Water Works (Pty.), Ltd.; S.A. Sweet Manufacturing Co. (Pty.), Ltd. Pub. act.: Mem. of Durban Arya Samaj. Travelled extensively in South Africa, the Rhodesias, East Africa. Hobby: Gardening. Address: Bus., 503 Umgeni Rd., Phone 37467, Durban; Res., 56 Mons Rd., Bellair, Natal. PURMASIR, Gouri (Premvati); housewife; b. Pieter- maritzburg; y. d. of Mr. Gosai Maharaj of Maritz- burg; m. Sukhdeva Purmasir, e. s. of Mr. B. Pur- masir of Durban; 3 s., 5 d.; educ. V.D.S. Govt.- aided Ind. Sch., Pietermaritzburg. Pub. act.: Member of Durban Arya Samaj and Durban Central Indian Women’s Tennis Club. Rec.: Gardening and sewing. Address: 70 Mons Rd., Bellair, Natal.

---

## Page 11

182 THE SOUTH AFRICAN POWYS, Reuben, schoolmaster; 3rd s. o. John Edward Powys of Durban; b. Re- union, Natal, Sept. 28, 1903; m. Elfrida May, d. of I. V. Gobie; 35.5.3 d.; educ. Isipingo, St. Aidan’s Coll., Syden- ham; began teaching at St. Aidan’s Coll. in 1922; then at Stella Hill, Clairwood, Port Shepstone, Greytown (as principal) and back to Port Shep- stone as principal in 1951; qualified in T4 and T3b externally; now studying externally for B.A. degree. Public activities: Pres. N.I.T.S. (Port Shep- stone), comm. mem. Indian Child Welfare Soc.; mem. F.O.S.A.; hon. life vice-pres. Port Shepstone I.C.C.; dist. comm. Indian Boy Scouts’ Assoc. Recreation: Tennis, fishing. Address: School, Phone 476; res.. Albersville Rd., Phone 391, Port Shepstone, Natal. PREMA, Govindbhai Nathoo, mrchnt. tlr.; b. in Varad, Dist. Surat, India, in 1914; s. of Nathoo Prema; educ. in India and the Tvl; m. Laxmiben, d. of Ranchod Rama; 4 s., 1 d. Business: Joined the firm of N. Prema. Branches: Bhaga Morar & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., 46 Voor- trekker St., Vereenig- ing; Rema Clothing Mnfrs., 35 Commis- sioner St., Jhb. Pub- lic activities: Sec. Tvl. Darjee Mandal; com. mem. Transvaal H. Seva Samaj; ex-treas. Hindu Youth Club; ex-sec. Gugrat C.C.; life mem. Hindu C.C. Address: 33b Sauer St., Johannesburg, Phone 33-6069. RAGHU, Ramkissoon, furniture manufacturer and transport operator; b. Durban, 1896, e. s. of Ram- kissoon of Mayville, Durban; educ. Cato Manor Indian School; m. Rajwanthie, e. d. of Bheeka of Inanda, 9 s,, 2 d. Bus.: Est. public transport business in 1929, and furniture factory in 1930, trading as Raghu Bros. Public activities: Foundation mem. of Arya Yuvuk Sabha and Benevolent Home; comm. mem. Cato Manor Crematorium; mem. N.I.C. and several other religious and sporting bodies; visited India in 1940, also the Rhodesias; played golf, tennis, soccer and cricket in younger days. Address: 164 Blinkbonnie Rd., Mayville, Phone (Res.) 882752: Bus., 888477, Durban. INDIAN WHO'S WHO PREM, S. Joe, clerk; b. 1919, Sydenham, Durban; s. o. C. Chumman; educ. St. Aidans and M. L. Sultan College; m. Krishna Devi Basdeo; 2 s. Public act.: Asst. leader Sydenham United Rover Scout Crew; physical training instructor and first-aider; asst. sec. Natal Amateur Weight-lifting and Physical Culture Assoc.; was secty. and pres. Sydenham Cultural Instit.; comm. mem. St. Aidans Club; exec. mem, Sydenham Players’ Guild; vice-pres. Natal Table Tennis Union; silver medallist and comm. mem. S.A. Red Cross A.D. 62; was assoc. senior warden Civilian Protective Service; capt. Sydenham Unity F.C., 1949; was also capt. Mallison C.C.; hon. life vice-pres. Sydenham Cultural Instit.; comm. mem. Springfield Swimming Club; Springfield Arya Samaj and Andra Maha Sabha; mem. Protea C.C. Address: 23 Dunrobin Cres., Springfield, Durban. PUNCHAM, 0., re- tired; b. Basti, India, 1864; m. Dharyi; 3 s., 4d.; began cartage contr. bus. in 1927. Pub. act.: Keenly in- terested in the affairs of the Indian comm.; came to S.A. under the indentured scheme; worked in Charlestown, now re- tired; one of the town’s oldest _ resi- dents. Add.: 30 Kirk- land St., Newcastle, Natal. RAHIM, Abduroaf, general merchant; b. Cape Town, 1916, s. of Rahim; educ. Wesley Training College; m. Ayesha, 1 s., 1 d. Est. hus. in Salt River, C.T. 1936; now conducting bus. at 234 Long St, C.T., trading as Sonday Fruit Supply. Public activities: Mem. of local socs. and clubs. Address: Res., 29 Addison Rd., Salt River, Cape Town. RAJAGOPAUL, C., insurance agent; b. 1922; educ. Wood- lands Indian High School. Hon. life vice-pres. Technical F.C.; patron Techni- cal F.C.; auditor Hill- view F.C.; vice-pres. Northern Natal In- dian Football Assoc.; fas pres., now hon. life vice-pres. Maritz- butg Dist. Indian Football Assoc.; vice- pres. Maritzburg County Indian F.A.; was councillor Maritz- burg Indian Sports Assoc.; was sec. for a number of years of the Pietermaritzburg Inter-Race Soccer Board; councillor os THE SOUTH AFRICAN for a number of years of the N.I.F.A.; elected pres. N.LF.A.. 1957; councillor Natal Inter-Race Soccer Board, S.A.I-F.A., S.A. Soccer Federation; was councillor Maritzburg Indian Cricket Union; founda- tion sec. Midlands Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; auditor Midlands Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; vice- pres. Natal Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; councillor S.A. Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; vice-pres. Maritz- burg Dart Union; patron, was vice-pres. Natal Darts Union: patron Denver Dart Club, Maritzburg Table Tennis Club; exec. mem. Natal Indian Referees’ Assoc.; patron Edendale Tamil Educ. Soc.; councillor for a number of years Maritzburg Indian Tech. Instit.; hon. life vice-pres., was pres. for 7 years and was one of founders Maritzburg Indian Technical Students’ Soc.; “prime minister” Students’ Parlia- ment; was “minister on the govt.” Maritzburg Indian Parliamentary Debating Soc.; was vice-pres. Wood- land Old Boys’ Club; was sec. Hindu Youth Club; patron Goodwill Social Club; trustee Mt. Partridge Tamil Educ. Soc., Raisethorpe Tamil Educ. Soc., Pmburg. Tamil Sunmarka Sungham; was sec. Tamil Vathantha Kootam; was chair. Hindu United Service Brigade; treas. (was sec. for 12 years), Maritzburg Deepavali Cheer Soc.; was pres. Pmburg. Indian Poor Relief Soc.; vice-pres. Aryan Benevolent Soc.; served on the council Pmburg Indian Child Welfare Soc., Pmburg. Indo-European Jt. Council; was organising sec. Dominion of India Celebration Comm.; was sec. Dominion of India Relief Comm., which was responsible for collecting a substantial sum of money for Relief of Unsettled Refugees in India; was organising sec. Republic of India Cele- bration Comm.; served on various reception comms. to visiting missionaries from India to S.A. Rec.: Reading. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 63, Pmburg.; res., 57 Zeederberg St., Pmburg. RAJAH, Yusuf Ahmed, manufac- turers’ agent; b. 1923, s. of late A. E. Rajah; educ. at Car- lyle Street Govt.- aided Indian School and High School. Was assoc. with father’s bus., later went to India. On arrival in S.A. settled in Cape Town; joined brother’s bus., trad- ing as Khan Select Cafe. Returned to Durban in 1956, joined the firm of Continental Textiles and Agencies. Address: Bus.. Room No. 50, First Floor, Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria St., Durban; Res., 20 Sparks Rd., Overport, Phone 882816, Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 183 RAJKOOMAR, Ram- roop, ex-dental mech- anic and cartage con- tractor; b. Dec. 24, 1901; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban. Bus.: Worked as _ dental mechanic 1916-29, Royal Cartage Con- tractors 1930-34; dir. Table Mountain Trading Store 1941. Public activities: Foundation mem. Vedya Pracharnee Sabha in 1923; held post also as sec. and vice-pres.; pres. for 10 years Arya Nav. Jeevan Natak Mundal; amal- gamated to Veda Dharma Sabha; vice-pres. and sec. Silver Jubilee Comm. 1935, now hon. life vice-pres.; council mem. and vice-pres. Shri Vishnu Temple; and sec. School Building Comm.; mem. and trustee Seva Samaj. Sports: Mem. vice-capt. and capt. Royals F.C. 1915-26; vice-pres. for 10 years, pres for 3 years, now life vice-pres. Royals C.C.; mem. Referees’ Assoc., holding posts of vice-pres. and pres.; hon. life vice-pres. M.D.I-F.A., served for 25 years and now life vice-pres. Sports Assoc. Address: 8 Chutney Rd., Pmburg. RAMA, Parshotam; merchant tailor; b. Varad, Dist. Surat, 1913; 2nd s. of late Gopal Lala, formerly of Varad; came to South Africa in 1904, settled in Johan- nesburg; started own business with father as merchant tailor in 1927, trading in own name. Address: 37 Maddison Street, Phone 24-1039, Jeppe, Johannes- burg, Transvaal. RAMATHULA, Essop, general dlr.; b. Pinetown, Natal 1905, e. s. of M. Ramathula; educ. Pinetown Indian Sch.; m. Karrima Bibi, e. d. of A. Khan of Dannhauser, 4 s., 3 d. Bus.: Joined father’s bus. in 1922, trading as Mahomed Ramathula & Sons, now owner of a fleet of taxis. Public activi- ties: Chair. & trustee; keenly interested in sport, played cricket and soccer in younger days. Address: Bus., Moodie St., Pinetown, Phone 71294; Res., 4 Marianhill Rd., Pinetown Natal, Box 2, Phone 76498,

---

## Page 12

184 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO > THE M. RAGHAVJEE FAMILY €© RAGHAVJEE, Mamia (late); jeweller; b. Nagagaam, India; died June 7, 1947; 4 s., 2 d. Founder of Valjee Raghavijee & Co., jewellers and general dealers; one of the pioneers of the Indian jewellers’ business in Natal, which was handed over to his sons. RAGHAVJEE, Valjee; jeweller; e. s. of M. Raghavjee; b. Kathiawar, India, June 6, 1896; educ. India; m. Ujjam, d. of D. Kara, of India; 3 s. Bus. Jewellers; joint owner with brothers of Valbro Chambers, Victoria St., Durban. Generous donor towards deserving institutions and donor to several Indian organisations. Address: P.O. Box 2315, 108 Victoria St., Durban; Phone 20157. RAGHAVJEE, Mohan (late); b. May 27, 1910; died May 8, 1953; s. of late M. Raghavjee; 4 s., 4 d. RAGHAVJEE, Narotam; merchant and jeweller; b. July 28, 1923; 3rd s. late M. Raghavjee; educ. Centenary Rd. Govt.- aided Indian School; m. Jasoda, d. of Vallabh Kurson, of l Durban. On leaving school controlled father’s business and later established his own business under the style of Modern Jewellers, 85 Valbro Chambers, Victoria St., Durban. Pub. act.: Interested in welfare of all charitable organisations. Address: 108 Victoria St., Durban, P.O. Box 2315, Phone 20157. X RAGHAVJEE, Choonilall; merchant and jeweller; b. Durban, March 17, 1934; y. s. late Mr. M. Raghavjee; edtic. Centenary Rd. Govt.-aided Indian School, Depot Rd., and Sastri College, Durban. Bus.: Now active partner in family business of Modern Jewellers. Rec.: Table tennis, badminton. Address: 108 Victoria St., Durban, Box 2315, Phone 20157. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 185 ABBAI RAIDOO (Land Surveyor) RAIDOO, Abbai, land surveyor, B.Sc. (S.A.), B.Sc. (Eng.), (Rand), L. (S.A.), M.LL.S.; b. at Reunion, Natal, Oct. 18, 1920; educ. at Isipingo and Stella Hill, Sastri College from 1935-1938; passed Junior Certificate exam. with a First Class, First Division Pass; obtained First Class Pass in matriculation in 1938 with distinction in Latin; proceeded to Fort Hare in 1939; passed College of Education Diploma in 1940 and Bachelor of Science Degree in 1941 with mathematics and physics as major subjects; taught at Stanger and Sastri College from 1942-1946, during which time obtained the University Education Diploma in 1943: proceeded to University of the Witwaters- rand in 1946 to study for the Degree of Bachelor of Architecture; admitted to second year of study; completed four years course, but before complet- ing the final year of study abandoned architectural studies for Land Surveying at the same university; In 1952 completed the Degree of Bachelor of Science in Engineering in the branch of Land Surveying; after serving period of articles and on completion of the Trial Survey at the Surveyor General’s Office, Pietermaritburg, was registered as a Land Surveyor with the Central Council of Land Surveyors of the Union of South Africa, as required by the Land Surveyors’ Regis- tration Act. No. 14/1950, on Oct. 8, 1954; was elected a mem. of the Institute of Land Surveyors of Natal on Oct. 30, 1954; first non-European to be admitted to practise as a Land Surveyor in South Africa. At present engaged in private practice in Durban. At present part-time student at the University of Natal’s Town Planning School, for the Diploma in Town Planning; completed two years’ study and hopes to complete finals at end of 1958, Comm. mem, of Sastri College Old Boys’ Club. Married to 2nd d. of late Mr. and Mrs. A. P, Naidoo of Stanger, Natal; 2 s. Address: Bus., 208 Noor Chambers, 208 Grey St., Durban; Res., 37 D’Aintree Ave., Sydenham, Durban, Phone 29072, P.O. Box 747.

---

## Page 13

186 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO HAJEE ROSENDEEN RAJAB FAMILY RAJAB, Rosendeen Hajee; retd. businessman; b. Durban, 1887; 3rd s. of Mr. Rosendeen; 6 s., 1 d.; educ. Boys’ Model Sch., Durban, and also in the Transvaal. Joined father’s business as general dealer in 1908, later estd. Century Upholstery Works at Carlisle St., Durban. Pub. act.: Trustee Anjuman Esha-A-Tul Islam; trustee of May St. Madressa and Govt.- aided Ind. Sch. and May St. Mosque; also associated with many other organisations; made pilgrimage to Mecca in 1949; mem. Salamat Club. Durban, 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Natal, Phone 888584. RAJAB, Mohamed; director of companies; b. Durban, April 12, 1913; e. s. of Hajee and Mrs. Rosendeen Rajab of Durban; educ. Depot Rd. Ind. Sch. and private tuition. Director, Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan Cinema and several other companies. Pub. act.. Was con- nected with Durban I.L.T.C., Greyville C.C., Stella F.C., and other sporting bodies. Rec.: Physical culture. Address: 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal. RAJAB, Habib Mohamed, B.A., Dip. Com.; director of com- panies; b. Durban, July 18, 1915; 2nd s. of Hajee and Mrs. Rosendeen Rajab of Durban; educ. Depot Rd. Ind. Sch., Durban, and private tuition. Director of Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan Cinema and several other companies. Pub. act.: Chairman, May St. Madressa and Mosque; patron, Muslim Institute; patron, Muslim Council; ex-mem. of the Natal Furniture Manufactures’ Assn.; mem. of Industrial Council of the Furniture Manufacturing Industry = > (Natal); mem, of the Durban Ind. and Col. Juvenile Affairs Board; mem. of the Islamic Educ, Board, and other public bodies. Address: 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal, . Phone 888584, RAJAB, Abdul Majid; director of companies; b. Durban, 1918; 3rd s. of Hajee and Mrs. Rosendeen Rajab of Durban; educ. Depot Rd. Ind. Sch., Durban, and private tuition. Director, Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan Cinema and other companies. Pub. act.: Patron, Kent C.C., Clare C.C.; an exponent of physical culture and weight lifting. Add.: 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal. Phone 888584. RAJAB, Yasin (Omar); director of companies; b. Durban; 4th s. of Hajee and Mrs. Rosendeen Rajab of Durban; educ. Depot Rd. Ind. Sch., Durban, and private tuition. Director of Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan and other companies. Hobby: Photography. Address: 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal, Phone 888584. RAJAB, Akbar; director of companies; b. Durban; Sth s. of Hajee Rajab of Durban; educ, Greyville Ind. Sch., M. L. Sultan Technical College, Durban, University of Natal. Director of Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan Cinema, and other companies. Pub. act.: Chair- man, Muslim Institute (Dbn.) and secty. Natal 1 Council. Rec.: Angling. Hobby: Photography. Address: ig Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal, Phone 888584. bh RAJAB, Suleman Idris; director of companies;, b. Durban; 6th s. of Hajee Rajab of Durban; educ, Greyville Ind. Sch., M. L. Sultan Tech. College, University of Natal. Director, Summit Furnishers, Century Upholstery Works, Shah Jehan Cinema, and other companies. Address: 189 Clare Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal, Phone 888584, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO S) The Mahabir Ramawtar Family RAMAWTAR, Mahabir, General Merchant; b, Durban, November 10, 1891: ¢. s. of late M. Ramawtar Choudhary, of Baherich, Risia, India; 3 s., 3 d.; educ. at Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch.; for a number of years was employed as a Printer by J. Jones; later was associated with Irvington Dairies for nine years; estd. own dairy in partnership with brother, trading as Highwood Dairies in 1936. Due to the City Council of Durban expropriating lands and being affected by the law, had to discontinue the dairy business; later estd. a Morning Market Cafe at the Squatters Market. and Ramawtar’s Continental Delicacies at Warwick Avenue, Durban, also Ramawtar’s Trading Centce at Springficld Housing Scheme. Public activities; Ex-Pres. Durban Hindu Temple: S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; ex-Vice-President of the S. Dharma Sabha, Natal; also held Executive position in Arya Pratinidhi Sabha; (S.A.) and Hindi Siksha Sangh, (S.A.) Arya Mittra Mandal and Arya Samaj, Durban; toured India and Ceylon extensively 1951-52: met Pundit Nehru in New Delhi; also Rajkumari Amrit Kuar; Sic Kunwar Maharaj Singh: Maharajh of Jawaipur and several well Known International personalities; also visited the famous Elephanta, Ajanta and Ellora Caves; was present at the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth; later toured the Continent; visited Mauritius in 1954. Rec. Gardening. Address: 26 Stanley Copley Drive, Sydenham, Durban. Phone 88-8991. CNBECD RAMAWTAR, Chandraaskir (C. M. Choud- ree), Director of Ramawtar’s Trading Centre, Springfield, Morning Market Cafe; Ramawtar’s Continental Delicacies; and Highwood Farm: RAMAWTAR, Trading Centre ce. s. of M. Ramawtar; b. Durban, 13th lar's February, 1914; m. Shantidhaman; d. of Market Cafe; cies and Highwood Farm; b, Durban, late Dhanukdharie (Interpreter of Supreme 187 Ramaw- Morning Ramawtar’s Continental Delica- 27th Court); 3 s.; educ. at Depot Road Ind. Sch.: September, } of M. Ramawtar; toured the Union of S.A. extensively; Abhi- m. Sheilawathic, y. d. of Mr. and Mrs. B. manyu, his ¢. s., now studying Medicine at Maghrajh, at Carlisle the Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland. Rec.: Street Ind. Sch., : Gardening. Angling and Gardening. Address: 26 Stanley Address: 26 Stanley Copley Drive, Sydenham, Coptey Drive, Sydenham, Durban. Durban. RAMAWTAR, Pradhuman, Director, Ramaw- tar Trading Centre (Springfield), Morning Market Cafe; Ramawtar’s Continental Deleca- cies and Highwood Farm; b. Durban, 19th March, 1919; 2nd s. of M. Ramawtar; m. Sarojlatha, 5th d. of Dhanukdharie, of Dur- ban; 2 s., 3 d.; educ. at St. Aidan's Boys’ Sch.; toured the Union extensively, Hobby: Farming, interested in breeding pedigree 4 cattle. Address: 26 Stanley Copley Drive, AN Z ( Sydenham, Durban.

---

## Page 14

188 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO RAMATHULA, Shaik Osman Basha, general dlr., Pinetown Cycle Works; b. Pinetown, March 14, 1919; 3rd s. of Shaik Basha Ramathula; educ. Pinetown Govt. Indian School; m. Fatima, d. of Raj Mahomed of Fairbreeze, Tongaat; 6 s., 2 d. Bus.: Basha Rama- thula & Sons; took over father’s bus. in 1914. Keen on cricket. Address: 3 Moodie St., Pinetown, Natal. RAMATHULA, Shaik Rahamat, est. bus. as general dlr. and butcher in 1939; b. Verulam, July 27, 1912, s. of Mahomed Ramathula; educ. Malvern Ind. School; m. Mariam Beebee, 3rd d. of late M. L. Sultan, 2 s., 3. d. Capt. County F.C. (Sea View), Stars & Avondale respectively; won several __inter- town caps at Durban, played for Natal against 1934 All- India soccer tourists; capt. Pinetown F.C., winners of Suncrush Shield 1937 and 1947. Public activities: Mem. Pinetown School Meals Service, Motala Lads Hostel. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 2, Phone 76423; Res., Moodie St., Pinetown, Natal, Phone 77334. RAMCHANDER, Joe, chief barman; b. Umzinto, Oct. 24, 1913, 3rd s. of late Hookoom of Umzinto; m. Babra, d. of late A. S. Crompton of Fascadale, 3 s., 6d; educ. Port Shepstone Govt. Indian School. Worked in Port Shepstone, later employed at Rams- gate; was owner of ski boat for deep sea fishing. Public activities: Takes an interest in the affairs of the community; mem. of Ramsgate Angling Club. Rec.: Angling, football, golfing. Address: Bus., Rams- gate Inn, Ramsgate; Res., P.O. Fascadale Store, Fascadale, Port Shepstone, Phone 6. RAMDASS, Anghoo; company director; b. Jan. 25, 1910, Umgeni, Natal; educ. Umgeni Ind. School; m. Parbathi, e. d. of late Mr. L. Rajkoomar, of Verulam; 3 s., 2 d. Business: Director of firm L. Rajkoomar (Pty.), Ltd., undertaker, and managing director Inter- national Funeral Insurance Co., Ltd., Durban. Public activities: Grantee, Talawantsing Ind. School, Veru- lam; trustee Shri Gopalall Hindu Temple; trustee and treas. Werulam Hindu Burial Ground and Crema- torium; trustee, Verulam and Dist. Ind. Sch. Board; patron, Verulam Deepavali Sports Board; interested in educational, social, religious and sporting activities in Verulam. Address: Bus., 39 Cross St., Phone 24169, Durban; Res., 2 Iron St., Phone 60, Verulam, Natal. RAMDASS, Appalsamy; b. Congella, Dec. 12, 1924, 3rd_s. of late Ramdass of Congella; educ. Sastri College, J.C. 1946. Worked at various firms, later joined the King Edward VIII Hospital, qualified as male nurse in 1956. Public activities: Takes interest in all social welfare activities of the Indian com- munity. Rec.; Outdoor sports. Address: Bus. King Edward VIII Hospital; Res., 58 Richborough Rd., Clairwood, Durban, Phone 56131. RAMDASS, | Harilal, b. 16th June, 1932; s. of S. G. Ramdass; educ. Woodlands High Sch., Pmb. Tech. In- stitute. Public activi- ties: Mem. Young Ort- mans F.C.,, 1948; Council Mem. M.D.I. F.A., 1950 and 1957; Hon. Sec. Young Ort- mans F.C., 1957; Hon. Sec. Pmb. Dist. Ind. F.A.; represented this F.A. on Pmb. Council of Inter-Race Soccer Board, 1958; Founda- tion Mem. Culturals F.C.; Vice-Pres. Pmb. County Ind. F.A., 1954 and 1955; Pres. Culturals F.C., 1955-1957; Vice-Pres. Young Ortmans C.C., 1948-1950; and served on Pmb. Dist. Ind. Cricket Union; Hon. Sec. Pmb. & Dist. Darts Union, 1955- 1957; represented Pmb. and Dist. Darts Union on Natal Darts Union, 1956-1957; Pres. Pmb. and Dist. Ind. Technical Institute, 1950-1954; Sec. Bursary Board; Vice-Pres. M.I.T.S.S., 1958; Hon. Asst. Sec. Deepawali Cheer Soc., 1953-1957; Quartermaster of S.A. Red Cross Ambulance Detachment; Asst. Com- missioner, 1957; Mem. Pmb. Blood Transfusion Ser- vice. Add.: 38 Zeederberg Street, Pietermaritzburg. RAMESAR, Dev- narain, merchant; e. s. of R. Ramesar of Umzinto; b. Umzinto, Jan, Vhs el Od2::) im. Girjabhawan, 4th d. of late Mr. D. Sob- run (interpreter), 4 gs d.; educ. St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch. (Durban), Umzinto and private study. Started career as teacher at Esperanza and was instrumental in securing Provin- cial grant for the school, and also taught at Umkomaas. In 1940, assumed controlling interest in the firm of R. Ramesar & Son, general merchants; is also managing dir. of Rynie Cash Store (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Trustee and treas. Umzinto Hindu Burial Board; was branch sec. N.I. Assoc. and N.LC.; vice- pres. Park Rynie and Umzinto Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; treas. Alexandra County I.F.A. and chair. Umzinto and Dist. Indian Young Men’s Soc. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 23, Umzinto, Phone 67; Res., Park Rynie, Scottburgh, Phone 199. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 189 VV; The Ramchurran Newoor Family —& Gaithree Rajendra Indira Suminthra Geetha RAMCHURRAN, Newoor, merchant; b. June 3, 1907; y. s. of H. Newoor of Westville, Durban; m. Gaithree, y. d. of H. M. Choudree; 5 ch.; educ. St. Anthony’s, Candella, and Sydenham Training College, Durban. Bus.: After period of employment as mech, eng., embarked on a bus. career. A leading personality in commercial circles. Pub. act.: Grantee Westville Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; sec. Durban Hindu Temple; sec. Shree Krishna Temple; chairman of Council of Shree Sanathan Dharma Sabha, Natal; worked for the extension of Westville Ind. Sch.; a generous donor to deserving causes; vice- president Pirates Football Club; was capt. of Westville F.C. Rec.: Swimming, hunting. Address: Bus., 19 Etna Lane, Durban, Phone 26020; Res., 77 Devon Terr., Westville, Phone 85459. RAMCHURRAN, Gaithree; b. Durban, Aug. 23, 1928; m. M. Ramchurran; assoc. with her husband in most of his public activities.

---

## Page 15

190 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO RAMDHANI, Rabikissoon, transport operator; b. Durban, Jan. 11, 1911, 2nd s. of Ramdhani; m. Anupi, d. of late Mr. Ganas of Sea Cow Lake, 3s. 2 d; educ. Mayville and Depot Road Indian Schools. 25 Years in the cartage contracting business est. by his father in 1906; supplies sand and stone to building contractors. Public activities: Trustee and donor of land for M.E. School, Mayville; chair. Mayville Educational Building Fund; mem. of Springfield Indian School Board. Rec.: Fishing. Address: Bus., 23a Foundry Lane, Durban, Box 250, Phone 23845; Res., 111 Trimborne Rd., Mayville, Durban, Phone 888430. RAMESAR, Ramlal, b. Ist January, 1920; educ. at York Road Govt. Ind. Sch. and Maritzburg Ind. Tech. Inst. Bus.: Photo- grapher and Portrait Dealer. Public Act.: Was Sec. N.I.C. (Pmb. branch), 1948-54; was Sec. Pmb. Inter-Race Soccer Board, 1949- 53; was Pres. M.J.T. S.S., 1942-48; was Pres. Tech. F.C.; was Chairman of the Re- ception Comm. of the S.A.H.M.S., 1944; was Treas. of the Pmb. Indian Poor Relief Society, 1946-52; was Sec. of the Hindu Youth Club, 1942-52; Sec. of the Indian Social Centre and the Swami Gnananda Reception Comm.; was Vice-Pres. of the Maritzburg Scouts Assn., 1946; Organising Secretary of the Anti-Segregation Council, 1943, Councillor of the M.I.T.I.; was on the Execu- tive of the Pmb. Indian Child Welfare Soc.; Deepa- valli Cheer Soc.; Hindu United Service Brigade; M.D.LF.A. Azalea Week Comm.; Passive Resistance Council; was Comm. mem. of the Aryan Benevolent Soc.; Woodlands Ind. High Sch. Old Boys Club; Indo European Joint Council; and F.O.S.A.; served a term of imprisonment during the Passive Resistance cam- paign; appeared before Commission of Enauiry in connection with Hospital Services in Natal; repre- sented N.I.C. at S.A.I.C. conferences at Johannesburg and Cape Time; now settled in Durban; mem. of the Durban International Parliamentary Debating Soc. Add.: National Studios, 125 Lakhani Chambers, 2 Saville Street; Res., 265 Daintree Avenue, Syden- ham, Durban. RAMIAH, Ramaswami Venkitt, businessman; b. Greytown, Oct. 18, 1911, s. of Venket Ramiah; m. Miss Naidoo, d. of late Raja Naidoo of Pmburg, 4s. 2 d. educ. Greytown Govt. Indian School. Started bus. in Greytown in 1936, later at Loskop in 1938, now controlling a general dealers bus. in Estcourt which he opened in 1953; was sec./treas. Greytown Indian Tennis Club; founder and _ pres. Pirates F.C; ex-pres. Weenen County LF.A,; councillor N.I.F.A.; pres. Uplands I.F.A. in 1954; manager Uplands team in 1954; manager Uplands Team to tour Transvaal to raise funds for the T.LF.A.; mem. S.A. Andhra Maha Sabha; mem. Veda Dharam Sabha; partly responsible for the Indian ward at the Sanatorium; grantee and trustee Winterton S. L. Naidoo Govt.-aided Indian School. Rec.: Silver Medal by Transafrika Corres. Courses for outstanding results. Address: Bus., 114 Harding St.. Res., 154 Alfred St., P.O. Box 84, Estcourt, Phone 23. RAMGOBIN, Plarri- lall; businessman and farmer; b. Inanda, Natal, Sept. 5, 1922; m., 3 ch. Business: Manager Estate Ram- gobin; general dealer; refresh. room; motor garage; lorries & buses for hire; sugar cane planter. Public activi- tes: Grantee of, Inanda Govt. Aided Ind. Sch.; trustee Verulam High School; mem. Indian Medical Services Tr. Recreation: Tennis. Address: c/o Est. late S. Ramgobin, P/bag, Inanda, Natal. RAMJEE, Bhika Bhaga, insurance rep.; b. 1913, Dec. 31, Vankamer, Surat, India, y. s. of B. Ramjee of Middel- burg, C.P.; educ. Patterson High Sch. and Zonnebloem Col- lege, C.T., qualified at primary high teacher; m., 4.s., 2 d. Taught at Middelburg Dutch Reformed School through Afrikaans medium, later taught at Samuel Brooks Sch., P.E.; pay clerk for Tiekamdas Bros. 1936-45; sales manager Perfect Products Ltd. 1947-53; 1956 became full-time rep. of Norwich Union Life Insurance Soc.; was treas. and subsequently chair. of Kshatriya; was treas. Hindu Seva Samaj; was chair. of S.A. Maha Sabha Educ. Trust; former treas. C.I.C.; former treas. of Cape Indian Congress, P.E.; later chair. of same; has addressed Black Sash at P.E., C.T. and Fish Hoek; has made a profound study of group areas and has lectured at several toWns in the Union, notable was one at Grahamstown May 1957 where he was given the wholehearted support by the dignitaries of that town; also delivered.a lecture to the Instit. of Citizenship on the History of the Indian People in S.A.; also lectured to same Instit. on group areas and also to S.A. Instit. of Race Relations in 1956; appeared on behalf of the Indian community before a comm. to consider the Group Areas, as a result the Uitenhage Town Council rescinded a pre- vious resolution inviting the application of Group Areas; toured Rhodesia in 1952; visited India 1933. Rec.: Carpentry and gardening. Address: 28 Nelson St.. South End, P.E., Phone 24797. RAMJEE, Lala, tailor; b. Kadipor, India, Nov. 1913, e. s. Lala Makhan of Kadipor, India; educ. Kasbapar, Navasari, India; m. Maniben, d. of Makan Gopal, India, 4 s., 2 d. Est. bus. in 1940, trading as R. Lala, tailors, conducting bus. at 59 Market St., Johan- nesburg. Public activi- ties: Was chair. Sun- desh Kariala; chair. Kadiponan Soc.; keen supporter of educ. activities. Address: Bus., 59 Market St., Johannesburg; Res., Flat 4, 81 Central Rd., Fordsburg, Johannesburg. RAMKALAWAN, Tooranti; educ. High Grade Govt. Ind Sch. Public activities: Was pres. Ind. Young Men’s Club; sec. Arya Samaj; former pres. local Ind. F.A. and vice-pres. NLC. (Maritzburg Branch); served on Ind. Relief Com.; hon. life vice- pres. V.D.S.; played in S.A. Ind. football tournaments from 1921-6932; rep. Maritzburg in inter- town football 23 times; played for Royals F.C. and Pirates F.C.; in 1927 had the honour of being presented the trophy by the Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri. Add.: “Shanti Bhawan’’, 136 East Street, Pietermaritzburg, Phone 26828. RAMKELAWAN, Suthnarianparsad, _restaurantier and jeweller; b. Dundee Dist., s. of Ramkelawan; m. Bhagwathie, d.o. Kallideen of Ladysmith, 4 s., 1 d. educ. Glencoe Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. Started bus. as jeweller in 1951; now a co-partner with J. Kallideen in the Athlone Cafe; staunch mem. of Sanathan Dharam Sabha; keenly interested in the affairs of the community. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 267, Phone 701; res. 1 Ebinezer St., Phone 551, ‘Ladysmith. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 19] RAMKISSOON, _ R, bus owner; b. Over- port, Oct. 10, 1904, e. s. of late Ramasur Ramkissoon; m. Par- vathie, 2nd d. of Mr. C. Makhan = of Stanger, 5 s. 5S d. educ. Depot Road Indian School, Dur- ban. Was formerly engaged in bus. as general dealer, now operates fleet of buses (Imperial Omni- bus Service). Public activities: Chair. Non-European Bus- owners’ ASsoc.; managing director Sydenham Transport Co. (Pty.) Ltd.; trustee and chair. Shri Ramayan Sabha (Over- port); grantee S.R.S. Govt.-aided Indian School (Overport); grantee S.R.S. Private Platoon School (Overport); vice-chair. Ward 6 Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; comm. mem. Hartley Estate Hindu Cemetery: was responsible for the collection of several thousand pounds towards the erection of the S.R.S. School. Has two sons studying medicine in England. Was a keen soccerite in his younger days. Address: Res., 145 Centre St., Overport, Durban, Phone 888618. RAMPERSADH, Hurrichunder (R. Chand), s. of R. Ram- persadh of Westville; b. 1923 Durban; educ. St. Thomas School and A.Y.S. School; m. d. of K. Gopaul of Pmburg., 2 s., 2 d. Bus.: After period of pte. em- ployment, est. own bus., trading in fresh produce. Public activities: | Vice-pres. Leather Workers’ Union 1941; sec. of Indian Sports Ground Assoc. 1940; . pres. Pmburg Referees’ Assoc. 1955; sec. Evergreen F.C. 1939; sec. Skull F.C. 1940; manager Centrals for All-India Tournament 1946; delegate Pmburg. Referees’ Assoc. 1952; pres. Raisethorpe F.O.S.A. Care Comm. 1957, also held position as_ sec.; delegate to N.I.C. 1952; sec. Shree Sanathan Dharma Sabha, Raisethorpe; pres. Northdale Indian Welfare Soc.; sec. Allandale Tennis Club 1951, councillor and selector M.D.I.F.A.; patron Northdale F.C. and Plough Hotel Darts Club. Address: 87 Nagpur Rd., Northdale, Raisethorpe, Pmburg.

---

## Page 16

192 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 193 THE RAGUNANDAN RAMNATH _ °) The Ramgulam Rampersad Family © ye FAMILY RAGUNANDAN Ramnath, merchant; b. Verulam 1912, e. s. of late Ragunandan Manjee of Verulam; educ. Umhloti Ind. Govt. Sch.; m. only d. of Gangai of Sansouci; 1 s., 2 d. Bus.: On leaving sch. was an apprentice as a wagon builder, in 1940 estd. a box factory trading as Verulam Box Factory, later joined by brothers as partners. Extended bus. and became Proprietary Co., Ltd.; estd. service station in 1957, also engaged in cane farming. Has travelled in India extensively. A leading businessman in the district, employing over 100 employees. Pub. act.: Life trustee and vice-pres. of Shri Gopalal Hindu Temple Trust, also trustee and vice-pres. of Verulam Burial Ground and Crematorium; mem. of Natal Cane Growers’ Assn.; trustee of Verulam School Board; patron of Verulam I.C.C. Football Assn. and Deepavali Sports Union; mem. of Verulam and Umbhloti Rate Payers’ Assn.; pres. of the Sunday Service Groups. Rec.: Sports. Address: P.O. Box 52, Phone 12, Verulam, Natal. RAMPERSAD, Hansraj, Furniture Manu- RAMPERSAD, Rameulam, — Furniture RAMPERSAD, Meghraj, Furniture Manou- facturer; b. 10th July, 1932, Sydenham, Manufacturer; b. Umbilo, Durban, 1906; facturer and Passenger Transport Opera- Durban; c. s. of Mr. and Mrs. R. Ram- e. s. of late Ramgulam, formerly of P.O. tor; b. 5th July, 1933, Sydenham, Dur- persad; m, Kawala, 4th d. of Mrs. and Colonelgauj Garee Bazaar, district Gonda, ban; 2nd s. of Mr. and Mrs, R. Ram- the late Mr. Jaichun Baboolal, of Clare United Province, India: 4 s.. 5 d.; educ. persad; m. y. d. of Mrs. and the late Estate; 2 s.; educ. Essendene Road Gov- at Weselyen Indian Sch., Verulam; assoc. Mr. Jaichun Baboolal, of Clare Estate; ernment-aided Indian Sch., Sydenham: on with Uncle, late Bhabooti Bros., Verulam, 1 d.; Primary educ. at Clare Estate Ind. leaving school joined his father’s business. 1921; estd, business as Furniture Manu- Sch., Clare Estate and Secondary educ. RAGUNANDAN, Bharath; merchant; b. at Verulam 1915; trading as General Cabinet Works; Furni- facturer in 1927 and Gencral Dealers. at Sastri College; on leaving school joined : 7 z 5 2 ture Manufacturer, General Dealers and trading as General Cabinet Works; in his father’s business as a partner, trading 2nd s. of late R. Manjee; educ. at Umhloti Govt. Ind. Sch.; Transport Opermor: in January, 1957, 1938 as Passenger Transport Operator: as General Cabinet Works, General Dealers : se . . became partner in the Furniture business. Member of the Industrial Council for and Passenger Transport Operator; toure 1 s., 3 d. On leaving school joined brother in business and Pub. act: Mem. of the hm Samaj, Natal; the Furniture Manufacturing Industry. the Union in 1957/58. Pub. act.: Meio. . ; . . Arya Mithra Mundal, Sydenham. Hobby; Natal: Natal Furniture Manufacturers” of the Arya Mithra Mundal. Add.: Res., later became partner. Rec.: Angling. Address: P.O, Box Motoring. Add.: Res., 559 Randles Rd.. Association, Bus Owners Association. Pub. 559 Randles Rd., Sydenham; Bus., 26/28 52, Verulam, Natal. Sydenham, Durban; Bus., 26/28 George- act.: Trustee and Mem. of the Shri Sana- Georgchill Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Phone hill Rd. Sydenham. Phone 88-8909. than Dharam Sabha, Natal; visited India 88-8909. 1950/51, Mauritius 1955 and India 1957, Rec.: Motoring. Add.: Res., 559 Randles Road, Sydenham, Durban: Bus., 26/28 Georgchil) Rd., Sydenham, Durban. Phone 88-8909. RAGUNANDAN, Janakeepersadh; merchant; b. Verulam 1922; s. of the late R. Manjee; m. el d. of S. Brijnath, of Escombe; 1 s., 2 d. On leaving school joined brother’s busi- ness. Rec.: Angling. Address: P.O. Box 52, Verulam, Natal. RAGUNANDAN, Manijee (late); cane farmer; b. Cottonlands, RAMPERSAD, Baijnath, RAMPERSAD, ena ere re : j i i i b. Durban, 10th Jan.. b. Durban, 4th Ov., Verulam; es. of late Mr. Manjee of Bihar, India. Died at the Sees aad ene Ta PE rhe ben lige ep ede age of 55, in 1956. Ramgulam Rampersad: at- Ramgulam Rampersad; at- ' tending Essendenc Govt.- tending Essendene Govt.- ee aided Ind. Sch., Sydenham; aided Ind. Sch. Syden- Le toimed sie ie in bee and ham; visited Mauritius in i? visite ndia in wit j rs parents, Hobbies: Reading, aa Supt Jains ele t soccer, cinema and cricket. NES Sead) 7 See Add.: Res. 559 Randles Scouting. Add.: Res., 559 i Road, Sydenham, Durban, Randles Road, Sydenham, Natal. Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 17

194 THE SOUTH AFRICAN RAMLAGAN, Jan- gali; b. Pmburg Nov. 7, 1925, s. of Jan- gali. Occ.: Secretary; educ. Woodlands In- dian High School & School of Accoun- tancy. Public activi- ties: Sec. Pmburg In- dian Child Welfare Soc.; sec. Pmburg. & Dist. Indian Boy Scouts’ Assoc.; ex- chair. Hindu Cultural Soc.; ex-Mem. Hindu United Service Brigade; ex - mem. Cultural F.C.; coun- cillor M.C.LF.A.S mem. Goodwill Social Club; mem. M.I.T.S.S.; ex- mem. India Ind. Celebrations Comm.; interested in social welfare activities. Address: 22 Thomas St., Pmburg., Phone 22725. RAMPERSADH, Lutchmee, nurse; b. Durban, Sept. 9, 1937, 6th d. of Rampersadh; educ. Indian Girls High School, Durban. Took up nursing cn leaving school. Public activities: Mem. of the Girl Guides. Hobbies: Needlework. Address: Bus., St. Aidan’s Mission Hospital; Res., P.O. Box 8, Cavendish. RAMPERSADH, Phulackdhari, head- master; b. Westville, July 1918, s. of Ram- persadh; m. Tulsee, d. of Sookaloo, 1 ds; educ. St. Thomas School, Sastri Coll. Has T.3 B. certifi- cate. Public activities: Mem. Arya Samaj, Westville; was also its sec.; taught at Roosfontein, St. Thomas and West- ville Indian Schools; now teacher at Charlestown; directed and produced many plays for the welfare of the Nou Javan Vidhya Mundal; keenly interested in social work; mem. Charlestown T.C. Rec.: Tennis, gardening and read- ing. Address: P.O. Box 7, Charlestown, Natal. RAMGULAM, Hariparsad, furniture manufacturer; b. Verulam, Natal, 6th s. of late Ramgulam of Durban, formerly of Colonelganji, Gouda, India; m. 2 s., 1 d.; educ. St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, Sydenham. Started business in 1939; managing director of Regent Furniture Factory, specialising in kitchen furniture, 69 Brooklyn Rd., Jacobs, Natal. Address: Bus., 69 Brooklyn Rd., Jacobs, Phone 877663; Res., 320 Voortrekker St., Jacobs. INDIAN WHO’S WHO RAMRACK, George, builder and cabinet maker; b. Durban, Sept. 2, 1888, s. of Pundit Ramrack; educ. in English and Hindi; m. Julia Choonoo 1914, 1 s., 1 d. Engaged in building industry. Local preacher in the Methodist Church of S.A. and class leader; was a keen soccerite in his younger days. Address: 46 Derring Rd., Bellair, Durban. RAMSAMI, Narainsamy (Joseph); b. Esperanza, March 10, 1917, Sth s. of late P. Ramsami of 12 Coronet Ave., Rossburgh; m. d. of late C. R. Manor, 4 s., 4 d.; educ. Umzinto Govt.-aided Indian School, Clairwood Boys School. Joined King Edward VIII Hospital 1936, qualified as a male nurse in 1951. Public activities: Mem. Bethesda Temple; takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Angling, swimming. Address: Res., 12 Coronet Ave., Rossburgh, Durban, Phone 56131. RANCHOD, Moti- ram Naran, merchant; b. Bardoli, India 1900, e. s. of Ran- chod Govan; educ. Bardoli; m. Mancha- bhen, d. of Govan Chiba, 3 s, IL d. Came to S.A. 1912, settled in Kimberley, after a period of pte. employment, est. bus. in Cape Town in 1932, trading as M. Ranchod, General Dealer. Rec. Read- ing. Address: 90 Station Rd., Obser- vatory, Cape Town, Phone 54101. RANDERIA, Phiroz, distributoref Indian films; b. Durban, Oct. 3, 1921, y. s. of late Shapurji Jivanji Randeria; educ. India and Sastri College, Durban. Pioneered importation of Indian films in 1942. Takes keen interest in affairs of community; “mem. Sastri College Old Boys’ Club. Hobbies: Photography. Rec.: Cricket and table tennis. Address: Bus., 19 Short St., P.O. Box 846, Durban; Res., 32 Raleigh St., Durban, Phone 26280. be The RAMPERSAD, Ramsumer (Rabbie), Printer; b. Durban, Jan. 5, 1925; ¢. s. of Mr. M. Rampersad; m. Kamalama- thie, 4th d. of B. Ramnarain, of Durban; 2 d.; joined his father in business as printer, now Manager. Pub. act.: Com. Mem., Briardene Ratepayers’ Assn.; Com. Mem. Natal Ind. Master Printers’ Assn. Add.: Res., 201 Buttery Rd., Dur- ban North, Phone 83-5433: Bus., 42d Prince Edward St., Durban. RAMPERSAD, Rajdew, Printer; b. Durban, Oct. 28. 1934; 3rd s. of M. Ramper- sad, of Durban; m. Chandra- wathie, d. of B. Seebran, of Mayville; educ. Umgeni Govt. Ind. Sch., Durban; joined his father in business as Printer (Durban Printing Co.). In- terested in sport. Add.: 185 Buttery Rd., Durban North, Natal, Phone 83-2340. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO M. Rampersad Family Ve (Durban Printing Company) RAMPERSAD, M., b. Durban. 1902: educ. Govt. Indian Sch., Umgeni, Dbn.; in 1918 worked as Printer: in 1929 started as a Master Printer in che firm name of The Durban Printing Co.. sole proprietor; recently opened an outfitting business in the firm name of Mayfair Outfitters; in 1951 he toured England and the Continent; in 1955 his trip to the United States included New York, Niagara Falls, the Ford Motor Works at Detroit, Chicago, San Fran- cisco, Hollywood, New Orleans, Miami, Washington: France, Belgium, Holland, Germany, Denmark, Sweden. Norway, England and Scotland; also visited The Printers’ Machinery Exhibition in London. Add.: Bus.. 42b & d Prince Edward Street. Durban, Phone 2-4916; Res.. 185 Buttery Road, Durban North, Phone 83-2340. 195 ye IKE RAMPERSAD, Devynarain Mohan, Printer; b. Durban, July 17, 1930; 2nd s. of M. Rampersad; m. Leela, ¢. d. of S. Dwarika, of Chakas Kraal; 1 s., 1 diy educ.: Um- geni Govt. Ind. Sch., Durban: joined his father in business as Printer; takes keen interest in sport. Add.: Res, 185 Buttery Rd., Durban North, Phone 83-2340. RAMPERSAD, Gopal, Shopkeeper; b. Durban, Aug. 5, 1936; 4th s. of M. Ram- persad, of Durban; educ. Um- geni Govt. Ind. Sch., Con- gress High and M. L. Sultan Tech. College; joined his father in business as partner of May- fair Outfitters, 42b Prince Edward St., Durban. Keen cricketer and soccerite. Add.: Res., 185 Buttery Rd., Dur- ban North, Natal. Phone 83-2340.

---

## Page 18

196 THE SOUTH AFRICAN RAMSINGH, Sunny John, chef; b. 1906, Pmburg; e. s. of Mrs. and late A, J. Ram- singh; educ. St. An- thony and York Road Indian Schools; m. Velaankania, d. of Mr. and Mrs. A. Pil- lay, of Durban, 3 s., 4 d. Started work as confectioner in 1918- 22; steward and chef from 1922-58; fresh produce dealer 1938- 39. Public activities: Foundation mem. of the Liquor & Catering Trade Union 1938; was chair. of the Union in 1938 and 1943, 1945-1958; mem. of the Industrial Council 1946-58; trustee of the Natal Liquor & Catering Trade Union 1950-58; patron and pres. of the Maritzburg Darts Union 1954-56: sec. of the Pmburg. Liquor & Catering Trade Union; was a mem. of the delegation which interviewed late Mr. S. S. Sastri in connection with the Liquor Bill; was a mem. of the central exec. of the N.L. and C.E.U.; was pres. of the N.L. and C.T.U. 1945-1947; was a mem. of the Colonial Born and Indian Settlers’ Assoc.; was a mem. of the N.I.C. (Pmburg. Branch); delegate to the Natal Catholic Assembly, 1947-50; secty. of the Natal Catholic Assoc. in 1951; mem. of the Standard F.C.; mem. of the Greytown LL.T.C.; sec. of the Royals Dart Club 1952-58; was a council mem. of the M.D.I.F.A. 1929-31; was pres. of the Umvoti F.C., Greytown and D.I.F.A. 1935-37, Creamery and Horse Shoe Hotel F.C., Crown United Fic;: vice-pres. Central F.C. and Young Colonials F.C.; St. Anthony F.C. hon. life vice-pres. N.L. and C.T.U.; vice-pres. S.A. L. & C. T.U.; was a mem. of the Stella F.C.: was sec. of the St. Anthony Soc. and later a comm. mem.; hon. life vice-pres. of the St. Anthony’s Guild. Address: 21 Ginman St., Pmburg. RANGASAMY, Tambie, transport manager; b. P.E., e. s. of G. Rangasamy; educ. Weis School & Patterson High Sch.; m. Ammorthum, d. of R. Pillay of Indutwe, 3 s., 1 d. Bus.: Est. transport bus. 1948, trading as Union Transport Co. Public activities: Self-taught physical educationalist; est. P.E. Amateur Weight- lifting Club 1939 for all racial groups; has won numerous pro- svincial and national championships since 1942; pres. S.A. Weightlifting & Body Building Federation, a INDIAN WHO’S WHO body which embraces all races; over 11,000 students have enrolled at his school and an exhibition was staged at Durban 1942; one of the founders of the National Body in S.A.; stages exhibitions of physical culture at the Feather Market Hall in P.E. annually; rep E.P. at national events on numerous occasions; 1953 acclaimed middle heavyweight champion of S.A.; still claims to be the undefeated champion today; has put on several shows in aid of charity. Some of his outstanding pupils are: Henry Hitzeroth 1952-54 middleweight champion; Young Coetzee, light heavyweight champion 1953; Ellen Plaatjies, S.A. lightweight champion 1955-56; Van Vuuren (European), E.P. heavyweight champion 1945-46; George Murphy, featherweight champion 1945-46- 47-48, he also won lst Mr. S.A. champion 1950; Otto Barnard and J. Neil are two European pupils who were outstanding wrestlers. In bus. conveys sports teams and church parties on trips during vacation. Address: Box 2129, P.E.; Res., 88a Com- mercial Rd., P.E., Phone 8295. RANGRAGE, Mia Ahmed, general merchant; b. Surat, India 1919. Public activities: Vice-pres. Dann- hauser United F.C.; vice-pres. Cricket Club; vice- pres. M.Y.M.A. Address: P.O. Box 68, Dannhauser, Phone 68. RASDIEN, Farieda, nurse; b. Jhb., June 16, 1936; Eurafrican Train. Centre, Jhb. On leaving school took up nursing. Public activities; Was mem. of St. John Ambulance Brigade for 7 years. Rec.: Danc- ing, sports, cycling. Address: St. Aidan’s Hospital, Durban; Res.. 14b 21st St., Vrededorp, Phone 353384, Jhb. RASOOL, Ahmed Taher; secretary direc- tor of companies; b. Oct. 3, 1932, Durban; e. s. of Goolam Mohamed Rasool; educ. Umgeni Govt. School & Sastri Col- lege, Durban. Busi- ness: Secretary Direc- tor: Cavendish Trans- port Co. (Pty.) Ltd.; Rasool’s Properties Investment (Pty) Ltd.; Sovereign Investment (Pty) Ltd. Public activities: Vice-pres. Vee C.C. and lub Alsportic; sec. Sastri College C.C. (1952-53); ‘Capt. Alsportic Club (1954); mem. Dazlers F.C.; mem. Sastri College Old Boys’ Club; mem. Rander Mehfil-e-Ikhlas. Recrea- tion: Cricket, soccer, golf, table tennis, caran board. Clubs: Riverside er Club Alsportic, Dazlers F.C. Address: Bus., phone 25259; Res., Phone 39696, 26 Percy Osborn Road, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN RASOOL, Goolam Mohamed; _ business- man and company director; b. April 5, 1905, Surat, India; e. s. of Malek Rasool; educ. Ladysmith Govt. School; m. 4th d. of late Mohamed Ballim, of Ladysmith; 3s. Business: Began as salesman, M. A. Motala Ltd., Durban; est. tea room business 1939; opened Enter- tainment House, “Fun- land”, Victoria Street, 1940; joined Omnibus Services (Pty) Ltd.. in 1946; prop. Cavendish Transport Co.; director of Clairwood Motor Transport Co.; est. Rasool’s Pro- perties Investments (Pty) Ltd., in 1942, and the Sovereign Investments (Pty.), Ltd. At present he is one of the biggest bus operators in Durban. Public activities: Member of various religious bodies; mem. Ozone Social Club, Recreation: Soccer, boxing. swimming, wrestling, hiking and reading. Club: Jackie Pillay’s Weightlifting & Physical Culture Academy. Address: Bus., Goodwill Lounge, Phone 22780, 38 Victoria Street, Durban; Res., Phone 29205. Flat 10, 33 Carlisle Street, Durban. RAWOOT, Hoosain Allie, merchant; b. Walwati. Kolaba, India, May 1920; educ. Walwati and Cape Town; m. Shariffa, y. d. of Shaik Allie Aravie of Bombay, India, 3 s., 1 d. On leaving school joined father’s bus. and later in 1947, took full control. Visited India three times; chair. of Walwot Educ. Soc.; treas. of Mohammedan Educ. Soc; active social worker and takes keen interest in Moslem religion. Address: Bus. and Res., 22 Somerset Rd., Cape Town, Phone 23489, RAWAT, Haj Ismail Abdul-Haque, Mrcht.; b. Pietermaritzburg, 1915; educ. Sastri Col- lege; m. Ayesha Omer, of Volksrust; 7 d., 3s. Bus.: Direc- tor of E. C. Rawat & Sons, Estd. 1880. Pub- lic activities: Treas. Pmb. Ind. Tech. Insti- tute; Hon. Asst. Sec. Aryan _ Benevolent Society; Pres. Pmb. Ind. Sports Assn. for 8 years and Pmb. Ind. Cricket Union for 5 years; Pres. Pmb. & Dist. Muslim Service League, 15 years; Vice-Pres. Pmb. Ind. F.A.; twice Pres. Natal Ind. C.U.; Comm. Mem. Ind. Child Wel- fare Soc. Rec.: Sport. "Add.: 69 Church Street, Pieter- maritzburg, Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 197 RAWOOT, Yusuf Allie, b. Walwati, Bombay, India, s. of Hajee Allie Abdura- zac Rawoot; educ. Walwatu and Cape Town; m. Jammilla. d. of Hassan Moha- med Jaffar Sonday of Cape Town; 2 s., 4 d. On leaving sch. joined uncle in bus; in 1941 went to India; re- turned 1943 and took over father’s bus. in Somerset Rd., C.T.; opened branch shop at 100 Wale St. C.T.: now conducting both businesses; treas. Walod Muslim Soc.; takes active interest in religion and sport. Address: Bus., & Res., 100 Wale St.. Cape Town, Phone 30170. REDDY, Sadagopaul Nadasen (Mickey, sen. bookkeeper, Local Health Commission; b. Pietermaritzburg, 1924; s. of late Sada- gopaul Reddy; educ. Woodlands Ind. High School; bus.: Senior Bookkeeper. Public activities: Sec./Treas. Y.N.F.C. since 1948; treas. M.D.LF.A. 1949-1950, 1953-1955; vice-pres, M.D.I.F.A. 1957; vice-pres. M.C.- LF.A,. since 1955; rec. clerk for M.C.LF.A. since 1956; sec./treas. M.D.1.C.U. seasons 1952-3-4-5; sec. /treas. N.LC.U. 1955/6; treas. N.LF.A. 1954; H.L.V.P. Mar. Ind. Tech. Stu. Soc.; pres. M.LT.S'S. since 1954; Counc. M.I. Tech. Inst.; mem. F.O.S.A. Aud, Dep. Cheer Soc.; Counc. A.B.S.; vice-pres. M.D.LC.U. 1957; vice-pres. Red Square Lads Sports and Soc. Club.; Aud. N.LC.U. 1957; Rec. Pub, Act. Add.: c/o 133 Retief Street, Phone 22228, Pietermaritzburg. REDDY, Soobiah Coopsamy, social worker; b. Durban, April 4, 1919, Sth s. of late Coopsamy Reddy Jimmie of Durban; m. Sombarnaum, 3rd d. of Harry Ruthnaum of Pmburg., 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Clairwood Indian High School. Worked at a blanket factory as weaver; later qualified as a blanket examiner at the Con. Tex. Mills (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Was pres., sec. and treas. of Clairwood Indian Youngmen’s Club from 1937; exec. mem. Tex. Workers’ Indus. Union (S.A.) in 1947; sec. (scribe) for the first Dbn. Ind. Rover Crew, Ross- burgh; sec. Shree Muruga Kadavul Temple, Jacobs in 1946; comm. mem. Clairwood Social Services; comm. mem. Dbn. Ind. Child Welfare Soc.; founda- tion mem. and sec. Amazimnyama Est. Tenants’

---

## Page 19

198 THE SOUTH AFRICAN Assoc, Brickyard Area, Clairwood 1956-57; patron o1 the Crystal Social Club; sec. and delegate Coastal Royal F.C.; patron Shaletonian F.C., Clairwood. Address: 67 Shale Rd., Clairwood, Durban. REDDY, Santhan Krishnasamy, school- master; e. s. of late Mr. and Mrs. K. P. Reddy of Maritzburg; b, Maritzburg, Dec. 18, 1907; m. Kama- lam, 2nd d. of George Naidoo of Ladysmith; 5 s., 3 d.; educ. E.P.S. and York Rd. Govt. Sch., Pmburg.; joined teachers’ staff EPS. in Maritzburg at the age of 13. After 9 years’ service was transferred to Dun- dee then, in 1924, to : Umgeni Rd. _ Pro- moted prin. Colenso Govt.-aided Sch. in 1946; now prin. Coedmore Govt.-aided Sch, Pub. act.: Comm. of Oaths for Estcourt dist.; was acting interpreter on several occasions at branch courts; was mem. of Estcourt Welfare Socty. A well known sports administrator, he was manager of the N. Natal Sam China Cup soccer team in 1952, also delegate to S.A.LF.A.; chairman, Natal Referees’ Assn. and officiated in many provincial matches; was mem. of Natal teachers’ cricket team which toured the Union in 1951; has represented Maritzburg, Klip River and Dundee at soccer; vice-pres. N. Coast I. Football Assa.; chairman, N. Coast Referees’ Assn. and mem. of Natal Exe.; was chairman, Weenen County LF.A.; has represented North Coast at cricket several times; foundation mem. N. Coast Sports Grounds Assn., N. Coast F.A. and Cricket Union; life mem. Sir Kurma Reddi School Committee. Recr.: Soccer, cricket, music. Address: Bus., Coedmore Govt.-aided Ind. fee Res., 68 Lower Bridge Road, Durban, Natal. REDDY, Tommy Narainsamy, business- man; b. Umzinto, s. of Subba Reddy; educ. Dartnell Cres- cent, Durban; m. e. d. of late Mr. and Mrs. N. G. Naidoo, Pmburg., 3 s. Bus.: Trading as Tommy’s Lounge, general dir., fresh produce and tea lounge. Public activities: Pres. Mid- lands Ind. Lawn Tennis Assoc.; ex- sec. Pmburg. Table Tennis Assoc.; ex- treas. Pmburg. Table Tennis Assoc.; joint sec. Pmburg. Indian Ratepayers’ INDIAN WHO’S WHO Assoc.; ex-pres. Stella F.C.; comm. mem. Natal Liquor & Catering Trade, Employers Union. Interest: Tropical fish and sport. Address: 22 Vernon St., Pmburg., Phone 26582. REDDY, Velaydon, gen. merchant; b. 1913 Grahamstown, 2nd s. of G. Reddy of Mauritius; educ. Union and Patterson High Schools; m. Sarthambal, d. of late V. G. Naidoo of Dbn., 1 d. Bus.: In 1934 was set up in bus. by © late mother trading as Sunrise Fruiterers; later expanded bus. by new premises at 265 Kempston Rd., trading as Piccadilly a Shoe Store & Picca- dilly Fruiterérs. Mem. of Subramoniar Temple, also on Govt. Council; toured India in 1951; took course in music there (Mirthingam). Rec.: Tamil music and literature. Address: 265 Kempston Rd., North End, P.E., Phone 87361. REDDY, Zainab, artist; b. at Poona, India 1930, d. of Ahmedali Abedin Madaraswalla, retired Magistrate of Poona; educ. Senior Cam- bridge Diploma of Arts, Bombay; m. A. V. Reddy, 2nd s. of Ganga Rajoo Reddy of Stanger, 2 d. Arrived in S.A. in March, 1955, taught art at the Temple (ndian Girls’ School, Durban and M, L. Sultan Tech. Coll.; exhibited her work at the Neil Sacks gallery in July, 1957; has given talks on arts at various centres in Durban. Public activities: Mem. of the Bellair Social Club. Rec.: Swimming, badminton and reading. Address: P.O. Box 181, Stanger; 12 Rood St., Stanger; also at 34 Lorne St., Durban. / REHMAN, Bobby, coach uM 4th s. of Rehman; b. Clairwood, Durban, Nov. 5, 1911; educ. Clair- wood Govt.-aided Indian School; m., 6 s., 3 d. Bus.: Bobby’s Coach Works, est. 1946; previously employed by the firm Norman Burns & Bertie Williams, Coach Builders. Address: Bus., 354 Flower Rd., Clairwood; Res., 123 Umbilo Rd., Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN REHMAAN, Abdool, producer and director of shows; b. Clairwood, Durban 1903, e. s. of Lali; m. Mariam Bee Bee, d. of late Khalil of Bengal. Entered the printing trade in 1932, employed by Spicers. Public activities; Was a mem. of the Star of India F.C.; was a mem. of the Clairwood and United F.C.; was a mem. of the Oriental Dramatic Company, since 1927; later joined Shaik Mehtabs Co., offering his services for entertaining guests at weddings; interested in Hindu classical songs and film music; organised shows in aid of the poor with Quwali entertainments; is a play writer and has performed over the radio, under the Raj Radio entertainers; produced the show “Flame of Araby”. Lia Play writing. Address: 26 Dayal Rd., Clairwood, urban. RODGERS, Miss Iris Mary Rosaline, schoo] teacher; b. May 28, 1936, Cape Town, d. of Joseph Anthony Rodgers; educ. at St. Augustine’s Training College. At 18 years started teaching; trained at St. Augus- tine’s Training College; was on staff of Holy Cross School, Cape Town; studied music (piano) at Holy Cross Convent; Mem, of the art and academy sch.; has exhibited her work to public, which included a stained glass window; teacher of ballet and tap dancing. Public activities: Treas. of the Holy Cross Recreation Youth Club; sec. of the Catholic Teachers’ Assoc.; mem. of the Order of St. Fancis; also asst. sec.; organiser of several concerts in aid of charity; organiser of the health and beauty section for the Women’s Physical Culture. Rec.: Dancing, Mountaineering (Table Mountain). Address: 1 Ashley St., Cape Town. ROYEPPEN, Ernest John, retired civil servant from Pro- tector of Ind. Immi- grants Office, Durban in 1952 after 42 yrs. service; b. Durban, March 21, 1892, e. s. late Mr. and Mrs. Anboo Royeppen of Durban; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban; m. Rebecca, 4th d. of the late Rev. and Mrs. John Thomas, minister Methodist Church, Pmburg., 3 d. Was employed as clerk & interpreter at the Indian Immigration Office, Durban since 1910; served this office for 42 years, now retired; an active mem. of the Methodist Indian church; commenced as a Sunday school teacher in 1909 and became a local preacher in 1911; at present senior local preacher; mem. of the Indian Mission Comm.; was the first Indian rep. to the S.A. Methodist Conference held in Durban in 1952. Rec.: Sport, travel books. Address: Res., 15 Bentley St., Durban, Phone 67056. G INDIAN WHO’S WHO 199 ROOKNOODEEN, Hajee, b. Chiplun, India, 1876; e. s. of late Khan Sahib Goolam Hoosen Desai, of Chiplun, Bombay, where he was pres. of the munici- pality for many years and was a leading merchant; educ. Elphinstone High School and College, Bombay: matriculated 1897. Arrived in S.A. in Dec., 1902; settled in Durban; employed as bookkeeper. In 1908 est. bus. as general agent, trading in timber and building materials. Public activities: Was co-worker with Mahatma Gandhi and foundation mem. of the N.LC.; mem. of the deputation which interviewed the Cabinet in 1924 in connection with Boroughs Ord.; mem. of deputation to India re the agitation against the Class Areas Bill 1925; was treas. of the Indian comm. organised by the Mayor, late Mr. Nicholson, in 1915 for Indian community’s contribu- tion to war funds; in 1936 went on pilgrimage to Mecca, Medina; toured Middle East and Europe; foundation mem., now vice-pres. of Orient Club. Address: 94/6/8 Prince Edward St., Durban, Phone 21926. ROYEPPEN, Joseph, Barrister-at-Law, B.A. (Can- tab.); Attorney and Conveyancer; was associated with late Mahatma Gandhi; has written numerous articles for the Press in S.A.; was “leader writer” for S.A’s. Indian Newspaper, “The Leader.” Add.: Carim Bldgs., 82 Victoria St., Durban. ROYKER, Abdul Kader Omar, mer- chant; b. Morba, Kolaba, India, 1914, s. of Omar Royker; educ. in India and Cape Town; m. Latiffa, d. of HN. Tarkay, 5. s, 5d. Settled in Athlone since 1903. On re- turn from India in 1938, opened own bus. in Klipfontein Rd., Athlone, trad- ing as A. Royker; now trading as A. K. Royker & Sons, and Dawood & Idroos. Public activities: Was chairman of Athlone Traders’ Assoc.; mem. of political and social organisations. Address: Bus. and Res., Klip- fontein Rd., Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 64805. RUSTOMIJEE, Sorabjee Rustomjee, M.B., B.Ch., medical practitioner; b. Durban Feb. 6, 1931, s. of Sorabjee Rustomjee. Conducts a special service for the benefit of poor Africans. Address: Bus., Surgery, Cato Manor African Location; Res., 106 Mansfield Rd., Durban.

---

