# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt8
**Total Pages:** 11

---

## Page 1

200 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO RUSTOMJEE, Sor- abjee, Commissioner of Oaths; b. 110 Field St., Durban, Dec. 25, 1895; educ. Durban and New High School, Bom- bay, and Panchgani, nr. Mahableshwar. Outstanding public worker, connected with Mahatma Gandhi since a youth; imprisoned time of Passive Resistance 1913, went on hunger strike in gaol. Has taken part in practi- cally every public movement and consulted on Indian question by eminent leaders in India; mem. of South African Indian deputation to India to agitate against Class Areas Bill and met then Viceroy, Lord Reading; pres. of S.A.LC. at visit of Fazl-i Hussain delegation at Cape Town in 1931-1932; occupied residence of Lord de Villiers at Wynberg, to entertain, on behalf of community, members of both Indian and Union delegations; was pres. Natal Indian Congress; again pres. 1939; joint sec. N.LA. Address: New India Buildings, 17 First Ave.; Tel. Add.: “Rustomjee”, Durban, Natal. SADANANDAN, Soobiah (S. S&S. Pather), headmaster; b. Pmburg., Dec 1, 1912, s. of V. Soo- biah Pather; m. d. of M. Pillay of Dundee, 3. 3, 35d. veduc. Woodland’s Indian High School and University of Natal. Public activities: Foundation mem. Fraternity Social C., Pmburg.; _ sec./treas. H.Y.M.A., Pmburg.; ’ vice-pres. Tamil Prot. Sls Assoc., Pentrich; Sch. Inspr. of T.P.A. and H.Y.M.A. (Vernacular section); mem. N.LT.S. Pmburg branch; one of the founders of Divine Life Soc., Pmburg. branch; treas. Divine Life Soc.; dele- gate Divine Life Soc. and T.P.A.; preacher Divine Life Soc; mem. Pmburg. Thirukootam; organiser Indian School Athletics and Sports in Pmburg.; asst. teacher at Dannhauser in 1932; promoted prin- cipal at New Hanover and transferred to T.P.A. Indian School in 1948 where he is now serving. Address: 18 Vernon St., Pmburg. SADER, Ahmed Hoosen, medical practitioner; b. Ladysmith, s. of Hoosen Ebrahim Sader; m. Khatija, d. of Cassim Ebrahim Jasat of Pmburg.; educ. Lady- smith Govt. Indian School, Sastri College, Birming- ham University. Director Sader Bros. (Pty.) Ltd., Sader Investment (Pty.) Ltd., Kalsad Printing Works (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Organised the Inter. Union of Students and World Federation of Demo- cratic Youth in England; rep. All-India students on these bodies; pres. India League in England in 1939-1947; presided World Student and Youth Con- ference at Prague in 1945-46; and toured the Euro- pean Continent for these organisations; pres./sec. Guild of Undergraduates, Birmingham University; started practising in Ladysmith in 1948; pres. N.LC. (Ladysmith); vice-pres. N.I-C.; treas. S.A.LC, 1949- 50: pres. Ladysmith Ratepayers Assoc.; sec. Lady- smith Educ. Com. of the Madressa & Mosque Trust.; was responsible for the statues at the Wesselsnek Indian School. Rec.: Gardening, horse riding. Add- ress: Bus., 288 Murchison St., Phone 438; Res., 27 Murchison St., Ladysmith, Phone 372. SADER, Cassim Ismail, bookkeeper; b. Matiwane, June 29, 1924; educ. Ladysmith Govt. Indian School, now known as Windsor High School; m. d. of Ismail Kikia of Dundee, 3 s., 1 d. Bus.: Connected with father’s bus. at Matiwane. Public activities: Sec. Natal Indian Congress (Ladysmith Branch); comm. mem. Ladysmith Indian Rent and Ratepayers’ Assoc.; comm. mem. Ladysmith Indian Educ. Committee; comm. mem. Ladysmith Mosque and Madressa Trust; was assoc. with work in connection with the Group Areas at Ladysmith. Rec.: Swimming. Add- ress: 35 Illing Rd., Ladysmith. SAM, Anthony Em- manuel; b. Kimberley, June 11, 1887; m. Anthonimal Harriet, d. of late A. Lazarus of Jhb. Est. bus. 1929, trading at Fish and Chips Saloon; later opened branch at Berry’s Corner in 1956. Public activities: Started soccer career in 1902 retiring in 1913; capt. Griq. West LF.A. at S.A. Indian tournament at Durban 1913; man- ager Griq. West LF.A. team 1920; champ. track cyclist at Kimberley 1910-13; rep. Diamond Fields at Cape Cycle Champ. at Paarl 1911; winner of billiards champ. at Kimberley 1910; auditor S.A.LF. Board 1904; sec. Griq. West IF.A. 1907-13; sec. Coloured Cricket Board Kimberley 1913; pres. Colonial-Born Assoc. C.T. 1925; pres. E.P.I.F.A. 1926, now hon. life vice-pres.; patron and donor of Mani Sam’s Cape Quadrangle Cup; patron E.P. Cricket Indian Football a Address: Bus., 5 Grahamstown Rd., P.E.; Resi{ “Haroldene”, Edgar Lane, North End, P.E., Phone 86613. SADHAL, Bala, director and contractor; b. Tongaat, 1913, 3rd s. of late Mulla of Tongaat; educ. at Tongaat Govt.-aided Indian School; m. Radha, 2nd d. of late Ramnarain of Nonoti, 6 s., 4 d. Served apprenticeship with building contractor; branched THE SOUTH AFRICAN out on own at Tongaat; was responsible for the erection of the Tongaat Health Centre, Tongaat Market, Tongaat Indian School; also built, with the assistance of his brother, the Secondary Indian School, costing £45,000 at Tongaat; est. a Co- operative Store, trading as Bharat Co-operative Trad- ing Soc.: also a cane farmer. Public activities: Trustee of the Emona School of Tongaat; chair. and trustee of the Vishwaroop Temple and Dharal- sala; trustee and chair. of the Doornkloof Indian School Comm.; mem. of the Cane Growers’ Assoc.; mem. of the Tongaat School Trust Board. Rec.: Social work. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 47, Tongaat, Phone 44; Res., Main Rd., Tongaat. SAMPSON, Rungasamy Chinniah, butcher and farmer; Sth s. of C. Chinniah of Umzinto; b. Umzinto, Nov. 19, 1919; m. Pathmavathee, d. of A. V. Pillay of Overport, Durban, 1 s., 3 d. Est. butchery at Braemar in 1948, also cane farming. Public activities: Chair. Braemar Govt.-aided Indian School Board; is interested in all aspects of com- munity hfe of Braemar and Umzinto. Rec.: Soccer, angling. Address: Braemar Butchery, P.O. Braemar, Natal, Phone 4. SAMUEL, Ramiah; b. Durban, April 21, 1915, e. s. of Samuel of Durban; m. Pushpah, d. of S. Naidoo, 2 s3 educ. Depot Road School, correspondence courses and at the M. L. Sultan Technical College; in 1952 worked in the X-ray dept. at the King Edward VIII Hospital, intends going overseas to further studies. Public activities: Mem. F.O.S.A., Sydenham Branch; Tamil and Telugu Welfare Soc.; ex-chair. Modern Youth Circle; sec. of the Hindu Social Services Soc. Rec.: Boxing, soccer. Address: Res., 147 East St., Overport, Durban. SAMY, Perumal Rama; Tamil school teacher; s. of Thrav- angadam Ramsamy; b. Standerton, Trans- vaal; educ. Boksburg Col. Govt. School; m., 7 children. official T.B. Ind. Assn.; T. Vedic Society; — est. schools at Bethal, Nigel and Germiston; mem. Tamil Benefit Society; com. mem. T.T. Federation, Swaraj F.C., Pretoria. Address: 1067 3rd Street. Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston. SANNASY, Simmadari (Sonny); b. Durban, Feb. 2, 1922, e. s. of L. Sannasy of Durban; m. Bakium, d. of Gurriah of Durban, 2 s., 5 d.; educ. Stella Hill Govt.-aided Indian School. Joined an electrical firm and later took up course at the King Edward VII{ Hospital; also dir. of Clairwood and Dist. Co-op. Soc. (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Served as INDIAN WHO’S WHO 201 chair., sec. and delegate of the Wanderers F.C. for three years; mem. of Bethesda Temple. Rec.: Soccer. Address: Res., Plot 45, Fenniscowles Est., Durban. SARAWAN, Devan- and (Dhew), teacher; b. Sept. 29, 1910; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Pmburg. Public activi- ties: Was sec. May- ville Indian Lawn Tennis Club, Dur- ban; asst. sec. Arya Yuvuk Sabha, Dur- ban; sec. Midlands District Indian Schs. Football Assoc.; sec. Maritzburg Golf Club, Pmburg.; councillor Arya Samaj, Pmburg.; councillor and auditor of the Veda Dharma Sabha, Pmburg., now councillor Aryan Benevolent Soc., Pmburg.; councillor Natal Indian Teachers’ Soc. (Pmburg. Branch); vice-pres. Hindu Youth Club, Pmburg; treas. Maritzburg Indian Youth League; sec. and treas. Maritzburg Indian Sports Assoc.; editor of the Hindu Youth Club Magazine. Hobbies: Golf and reading. SARDAR, Goolam Mahomed; b. Malekpur, Surat, Bombay, India, e. s. of Sardar Rasool; educ. India; m. e. d. of Hajee Rasool Mosum, 4 d. Took over father’s bus. in 1930, now trading as G. M. Sardar, runs branch store known as Popular Fruit Store and General Dealer. Treas. Simonstown Indian Muslim Soc.; hon. teacher of Simonstown Muslim Madressa in Urdu and Arabic; takes keen interest in Islamic affairs. Address: Waterfall Rd., Simons- town, Phone 96224. SATYAPAL, Soorya- kally Devi; b. Dur- ban; m. F. Satyapal, S21 2! Se Gud Public activities: Patron Ind. Women’s Assoc. (Pmburg); mem. N.I.C., Pmburg. Branch; supervisor Aryan B. Home; mem. Hindu _ Stree Samaj (Pmburg.); mem. Deepavali Cheer Soc.; popular hostess to many Vedic Preachers who visited this country from India; annually helped ‘ to collect funds for Indian unemployed comm. and a keen sick visitor; interested in educ., giving proof of this fact in her own family; interested in social work; a staunch disciple of Rish Dayanand and a great admirer of Mahatama Gandhi. Address: 134 East St., Pmburg.

---

## Page 2

202 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO The Ramgulam Salligram Family SALLIGRAM, Ramegulam, furniture manufacturer; b. Verulam, Natal, Jan. 20, 1912; educ. Sydenham College, Durban; m. d. of Mr. Ramsuran of Durban; 1 s., 3 d.; eldest daughter and son-in-law Sanjay Ramkissoon at present studying in Ireland; only son is also director of Jacobs Furniture & Bedding Factory (Pty.), Ltd.; business was established in 1933 and has since expanded to be one of the leading firms in Natal, specialising in “Period” and “Contemporary” designs. Pub. act.: Has served on numerous educational and religious bodies in Durban; has travelled extensively with his family in India and Europe. Address: Res., 65 Thorn Rd., Jacobs; bus., 232 Chamberlain Rd., Jacobs, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN SEEDAT, Dawood Mahomed, radio-trician; b. Dur- ban, 1932, 0. s. of M. Seedat; educ. Jhb. Indian High School; m. Amina, d. of G. H. Seedat of Newcastle, 1 s., 1 d, Joined the firm of Acme Radio service at Jhb., later employed by A.A. Radio Service in Durban; at present employed at Kathree’s Radio Service; takes an interest in tape recording for entertainment purposes. Address: Bus., Kathree’s Radio, Queen St.; Res., Flat 12a, Damjees Mansion, 195 Umgeni Rd., Durban. SEEDAT, Dawood Mahomed, insurance rep.; b. at Newcastle, 1899, 2nd s. of late M. E. Seedat, former merchant of New- castle; m. d. of late I. B. Timol, 3. s.; educ. at Newcastle. Joined father’s bus. In 1917 est. own bus. as general merchant at Newcastle; rep. of the Manufacturers Life Insurance Co. of Canada; chief Indian rep. for Natal; holds a certificate of merit from his company for outstanding work; also mem. of the two hundred thousand club; takes an active part in the social welfare of the community. Address: Bus., 168 Grey St., 3 Lakhani Bldg., Durban; Res., 37 Hampson Grove, Durban. SEEDAT, Hajee Goolam Hoosen Dawijee, director of companies; b. Veru- lam, Natal; e. s. of Dawjee Ebrahim Seedat; educ. Veru- lam Sch.; m. Fatima, 3rd _d. of Amod Dhai of Umzinto; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Director City Garage; prop. South Coast Tdg. Co., Rossburgh. Has tra- velled to Haj, to Mecca in 1951, also India and Pakistan. Will be travelling to Eng. and Continent in May next year. Address: Res., 24 Market Bldgs., Etna Lane, Phone 29087. eS SEEDAT, Ismail, merchant; b. Haramgam, Surat, s. of F. S. Seedat; educ. India; m., 2 s., 4 d. Arrived in S.A. 1908, est. bus. in Jhb. 1935. Reps. com- mercial houses; was vice-pres. Tvl. Muslim League. Address: 55 End St., Jhb., Phone 223292. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 203 SEEDAT, Kassim Mohamed, M.R.C.S. (England), L.R.C.P. (Lond.); b. Newcastle, Natal, 1897; educ. Newcastle Convent School, Bombay Uni- versity and London; m. d. of Mahomed Ebrahim. Started practice in Durban in 1930. Public activities: Interested in all matters affecting the Indian community; was vice-pres. and then chair. of the Ozone Club, Durban North; Divisional Surgeon St. John Ambulance Assoc. (Indian Brigade); keenly interested in the welfare of St. Aidan’s Indian Hospital. Clubs: Orient and Ozone. Address: 173 Grey St., Durban. SEEDAT, M. C., general merchant; b. Clairwood, 1933, s. of C. H. Seedat; educ. at Clairwood School: m. Sara, d. of Ebrahim Seedat of Stanger. Public activities: Mem. of the Clairwood School Old Boys’ C.C.; has rep. S.C.C.U. for number of years in inter-district matches; has been the only player selected to rep. Natal I.C.U. from S.C.D.LC.U. in representative matches; has scored several centuries for his club and the Inter-District I.C.U.; mem. Boystown F.C.; mem. Premier L.T.C. Rec.: Cricket, tennis, billiards. Address: 601 South Coast Rd., Clairwood, Durban. SEETHAL, Sewper- sadh Mungel, life assurance agent; b. Durban 1916, s. of M. Seethal; educ., holder of T4 Teachers Certificate 1939; m. Sylvia Freda, d. of late Mr. and Mrs. W. S. Seethal, Is. 5 d. Est. Life Assurance Agency Nov. 1936 after resigning from teaching post; rep. National Mutual Life Ass. of Australasia Ltd.; resigned in 1952 to join Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada; appointed Dist. Manager July 1955. Keenly interested in the work of F.O.S.A. and educational matters; has travelled extensively in S.A. and, Basutoland on bus. and holiday excursions. Rec.: Motoring, gardening, reading. Club: Overport Social Club. Address: 266 West Rd., Overport, Durban, Phone (res.) 884428.

---

## Page 3

204 THE SOUTH AFRICAN 2 P. SEEBRAN SEEBRAN, Pilau Soni, b. in India and came to this country in 1877; 6s. 1 di: Estd. business as Jeweller in 1879: visited India in 1886, returning in 1887 with eldest brother and several members of his family; Estd. Transport business, 1898. Later traded as General Merchant. Died on February 4, 1934 at the age of 70. INDIAN WHO'S WHO FAMILY < SEEBRAN, Bhugmani, b. Govakpoor, Jn- dia, in 1881, diced May 10, 1951; m. Mr. P. Seebran Soni in 1897 and came to this country in 1898; 6 s., 1 d. SEEBRAN, Paraw, Prop. Seebran Motors; e. s. of late P. Seebran Soni; b. Mayville, March 30, 1903; m. Isukraji, d. of Mr. Shewnandan Sawh, of Rossburgh, formerly of Umzinto; 6 s. 5 d.; educ. Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School. Estd. business sents South British Insurance Co. since 1934 and is a Director of Amalgamated Bus Co} 1918 (Printer); 1926 estd. transport business; estd. Seebran Ltd. Public act.: Trading Company in 1934 as general merchants, furniture manufacturers, garage and motor ad builders. Repre- Foundation mem. Bus Owners’ Assn. and served as secretary 1932-42; Pres. Mayville Lawn T. Club 1936-38; evci-pres. Natal I.L. Tennis Assn. 1936-38; mem. Sydenham I.L.T.C., Royals F.C. (Mayville); Pres. Cato Manor Indian Cemetery and Crematorium Assn.; Pres. Mayville Educational Socty.; Grantee: M.E.S. G.-aided Ind. Sch.; ex-Mem. Arya Yuvuk Sabha; travelled throughout the Union, the Rhodesias, Beira, India, Pakistan and Ceylon. Add.: Bus., 62 Bellair Road, Mayville; Res., 260 Jan Smuts Highway, Phone 88-8641, Mayville, Durban. a THE SOUTH AFRICAN 2 P. SEEBRAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 205 FAMILY continued © SEEBRAN, Ramsaroop, garage owner (Gateway Motors), 2nd s. o. late P. See- bran Soni; b. Mayville. 1906; m. Somaric, 5th d. o. late Mr. and Mrs. Gopaul Soni of Pmburg., 4 s., 3 d.; educ. Cato Manor Govt.-aided Ind. Sch, Estd, transport bus. in 1928; dir. of Amalgamated Bus Co., Lid.; is a mem. of the Arya Samaj, Cato Manor. Sport.: Capt. Mayville Royals F.C., played golf, tennis and billiards, owned billiards saloons at Clairwood and Dur- ban: is a keen angler. Address: Bus., 87 Bellair Rd., Mayville; Res., 39 Stone- haven Place, Phone 88-2090, Mayville, Durban. SEEBRAN, Kuseeal, transport operator, 4th s. o. late Mr, P. Seebran Soni; b. Mayville, 20th July, 1912; m. Parbathy, e. d. of Mr. and Mrs. Secparsad of May- ville, 4 s., 2 d.; educ. Cato Manor Govt.- aided Indian School, Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School. Sastri College, Durban. Joined his father in bus., Seebran Trading Co., in 1934, then branched out on his own, trading as K. Seebran, fresh produce and general dealer, at 62a Bellair Rd., Mayville; also transport bus. since 1938. Mem. of Arya Yuvuk Sabha, Benevolent Home, Arya Samaj (Cato Manor) and Durban International Club. Sport.: Played cricket at school and soccer for Blue Bells (Mayville), tennis for Mayville and Moon- lighters Clubs; rep. Natal at Tennis in the Transvaal in 1934, the same year he won the Natal singles and doubles champion- ships. Address: Bus., 62a Bellair Rd.. Phone 88-2492, Mayville: Res., 25-27 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban. SEEBRAN, Deochand Paraw, prop. Syden- ham Motors, bus. owner and general mer- chant, c. s. of late P. Seebran Soni: b. Mayville, 20th Dec., 1920; m. Chander- pathy, 5th d. o. Mr, and Mrs, Gajadhar Singh of Cliffdaie, formerly of Greytown. 2s., 2 d.; educ. Cato Manor Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Sastri College, Durban. Joined his father’s bus., Seebran Trading Co., and transport bus. in 1942. Public activities: Mem. Mayville Educational Soc., Arya Samaj (Cato Manor) Divine Life Soc. (Durban branch), Ramakrishna Centre: patron Mayville Hindu Youth Club and Westridge Social Club (Mayville); ¢x-mem. Sastri College Old Boys’ Club, Mayville and Durban Lawn Tennis Clubs, Durban Indian Camera Club; toured Northern Natal and Transvaal during the 1936 Empire Exhibition and the Union in 1940 with Boy Scouts. Address: 4 Blinkbonnie Rd., Mayville, Phone 88-8641 Durban; Bus.. 31 Randles Rd., Mayville, Durban. SEEBRAN, Basanth, merchant and bus owner, 3rd s. o. late Mr. P. Seebran Soni; b. Mayville, 28th Nov., 1909; m, Phulmathie, y. d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Mahilal! Soni of Vrulam, 6 s., 6 d.; educ, Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School. Estd. transport and general merchant bus. in 1926; is a dir. of Amalgamated Bus Co., Bonella Transport Co.; ex-mem. of Arya Yuvuk Sabha and Arya Samaj (Cato Manor); founder and capt., Mayville Tennis Club. Address: Res., 91 Blinkbonnie Rd., Phone 88-4267, Mayville, Durban, CNET O SEEBRAN, Dindeyal, bus owner, 5th s. 0. late Mr. P, Scebran Soni; b. Mayville, 28th June, 1915; m, Moongee, ¢. d. of late Jaichand Baboolall of Clare Rd., Clare Estate, 5 s., 2 d.; educ. Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School. Estd. transport bus. in 1939. Mem. of Arya Samaj (Cato Manor), Mayville Lawn Tennis Club. SEEBRAN, Ramdayal, prop. Gateway Motors and bus. owner, 6th s. o. late Mr. P. Seebran Soni; b. Mayville, 22nd Sept., 1922; m. Kalawathy, e. d. of Mr. and Mrs. A. Ramsunder of Cottonlands, Natal, 4 s., 2 d.; educ, Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School. Joined Seebran Trading Co.: commenced transport bus. in 1944. Toured Union with Boy Scouts, 1940. Ree.: Tennis. Address: 87 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban

---

## Page 4

206 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO SEETHAL, Christian H., insurance agent; b. Pmbureg, 1918; s. of W. S. Seethal; educ. Sastri College; m. Helen, daughter of J. Kisten, 2 s. Joined father’s bus. 1936. Has acquired a sound knowledge of all aspects of insurance work; rep. National Mutual Life Assoc. of Australasia Ltd. (Est. 1869), for life. endowment and educ. policies: also reps. Alliance Assurance Co. Ltd. (Est. 1824) for fire, accidents, and burglary. Pub- lic activities: Was Sunday School superintendent and sec./treas. of South Coast Indian Field Council of the Apostolic Faith Mission of S.A.; was also connected with Overport Branch. Hobby: Music. Address: 7-8 Progress Buildings, 356 Pine St., Box 2172, Durban. SEEVNARAYAN, Ramgulam, furniture manufac- turer and building contractor, 4th s. of late Mr. Ramgulam of Durban, formerly of Colonelganj, Gouda, India; m. Sth d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Arjoon Sonar, 4 s., 3 d.; educ. St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham. Started Natal Joinery Works (sole prop.) in 1939. Takes keen interest in the affairs of Indian community and a generous donor. Address: 257 Balfour Rd., Jacobs, Durban, Phones 87629/877035. SEEVNARAYAN, C. Ramgulam, housewife; Sth d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Arjoon Sonar of Mere- bank; m. Seevnarayan Ramgulam of Durban, 4 s., 3 d.; educ. Merebank Indian School. Address: 257 Balfour Rd., Jacobs, Durban. SEEVNARAYAN, Ramgulam Sookdaya, housewife; b. Clairwood, Natal 1891; m. Ramgulam of Durban, formerly of Colonelganj, Gouda, India. Address: 4 Brown’s Ave., Sydenham, Durban. SEWDUTH, Chatwan, garage prop., bus owner, cartage contractor and farmer; b. Durban, Oct. 31, 1897; m. Ganpathie, e. d. of Mr. Mahabeer of Phoenix, Natal, 4 s., 6 d.; educ. Higher Grade Indian School. Est. bus service on the North Coast, and later an up-to-date bus. service between Durban and Pmburg.; now prop. of Albert Motors, formerly known as Woodvilla Service Station, est. in 1924. Public activities: Ex-treas. and mem. Avondale Hindu Benevolent Soc.; ex-patron Stamford Hill Educ. and Social Soc.; patron DA. Golf Club, and donor of the Sewduth Golf Trophy; official of various other football and cricket clubs. Address: Bus., 95-97 Albert St., Durban, Phone 62131; Res., 97 Wood- ford Grove, Durban, Phone 31102. SEWGOLAM Laljee, businessman; b. Ladysmith, March 31, 1903: educ. Keate Street School, Lady- smith Govt. Indian School, now known as Windsor High School; s. of Sewgolam; m., 5 s., 3 d. Bus.: Est. Transport Bus. in 1946. Public activities: Pres. Arya Samaj since 1936; foundation mem. of the Hindi Yubuk Sabha; first pres. 1949 to 1952, also pres. in 1955-56; responsible for the erection of the Hindi Yubuk Sabha Hall and School, known as the Klip River Govt.-aided Indian School, present grantee of the school; has worked for vernacular educ. in schools; played football for the Schools F.C. and Ladysmith F.C.; foundation mem. of the Shamrock F.C. Address: 42 Caesar Rd., Ladysmith, Natal, Phone 995. SEWPERSAD, Lutchman, salesman; b. Durban 1933; educ. Sastri College. Takes an active part in the social upliftment of the community. Rec.: Angling. Address: Flat 26, 79 Prince Edward St., Durban. SEWSUNKER, Beharie, bus owner; b. Mayville, Durban, 1918, e. s. of B. Beharie; educ. Cato Manor Indian School: m. Kailas, d. of W. Hargoon of Umkomaas, 4 s., 2 d. Bus.: Was assoc. with uncle (T. Sookoo) in transport bus.; conducted own bus. since 1944, providing service between Pinetown and Durban. Public activities: Was manager Westerners F.C.; has always been interested in sport. Address: 27 Standard Rd., Mayville, Durban. SHABOODEEN, Mohideen Shaik (Shebee), book- keeper and clerk; b. Pmburg., Nov, 11, 1930. e. s. of Shaikh Mohideen; m. y. d. of Ismail Suleman Cassim of Mid-Iflovo; educ. Woodlands High School. Was employed as senior clerk at Georges Furniture Mart; at present manager at the All-Hour Garage and Service Station. Public activities: Mem. Muslim Service League; takes keen interest in the welfare of the Indian community. Rec.: Soccer, cricket, track riding. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 1, Edendale; Res., “Rahath Manzil”, 70 Rosedale Rd., Pmburg., Phone 29866. SHUNMOOGAM, Iyalloo, b. Pmburg., Oct. 22, 1928; s. of Shunmoogam; educ. Woodlands Indian High School. Occ.: Storeman, Eddels S.A. Ltd., Pmburg.; m., 1 s., 2 d. Rec.: Table tennis, music. Hobby: Wood- work. Address: Moodley’s Flats, East St., Pmburg. SIGAMONY, Clement, musician (guitarist); b. Pmburg, 1924, y. s. of late D. Sigamony; educ. York Road School; m., I s., 1 d. On leaving school, entered the Catering trade; later studied music as a hobby; and now a mem. of the Gay Swingsters Band; was a mem. of the Rhythm Scamps; was a mem. of the J. Martin and his Blue Birds Band; also the Swing Amigos and Rhythm Quavers; now mem. of the Blue Jewel Band. Address.: Bus., 191 Prince Edward St., Durban; Res., 63 Soldiers’ Way, Durban. SINGARAM, _ Ling- ham; b. Oct. 26, 1923 at Stormburg, s. of S. Padayachy; educ. John Bisseker School, E.L.; m. Letchmee Muthayan Ot) PHB. 2avehs cor) gy Public activities: Past pres. Hindu Religious Protection Soc. (2 years) and Merchants F.C. (3 years); was , treas. Border Indian WF .A.; rep. Frontier 4941-47; retired from play through injury; manager Merchants F.C. 1950 (Pmburg); manager Border Indian F.A. at Sam China Tourna- ment in Jhb. 1953; keenly interested in the promo- tion of Tamil education. Address: 5 Milton St., East London. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 207 SIMJEE, Abdulkader Amod, salesman; b. Durban, Sept. 1, 1932, 3rd s. of Amod Simjee of Pmburg.; educ. Sutherlands Indian School. Was motor mechanic at Laxmani Garage, Edendale; now salesman for the firm of Harleys, Durban; intends going overseas to study motor engineering. Public activities: Mem. of Muslim Circle; mem. of Edendale Youth Club; and also Edendale Mosque and Madressa, Hobby: Motor mechanic. Address: Bus., 469 West St., Durban; Res., 71 May St., Durban, Phone 65843. SINGARAM, Somasundram, teacher; b. Porayar, India, Oct. 2, 1906; s. of R. Singaram. Public activities: Took active part in sports, cultural, social and reli- gious administration, and held posts as sec., treas., pres., vice-pres., auditor and delegate to the affiliated assns.; trustee Jhb. Indian Sports Ground Assoc.; sec. Jhb. Melrose Viva Subramaniar Temple, S.A. Ind. Lawn Tennis Assoc.; act. sec. Tamil Paupers Cremation Fund; jt. sec. Jhb. Ind. Social Welfare Assoc.; ex-sec. Dravidians Football Club, Tvl. Indian Lawn Tennis Association, Transvaal Lawn Tennis Federation, Fordsburg Tamil School, Wit- watersrand Soc. for Arts & Crafts (Coloured and Indian Schools) Tvl., Moonlighters Cricket Club; treas. Jhb. Indian Sports Grounds Assoc., Tvl. Coloured Soccer Board of Control; ex-vice-pres. Tvl. Coloured Football Assoc.; auditor Jhb. Hindu Tamil Instit. Passed the Junior and Matriculation Certifi- cate of the University of S.A.; Tvl. Indian and Coloured Teachers Certificate; mem. of the Faculty of Secretaries M.F.S. (Eng.). Rec.: Sport. Address: 12 Wolhuter St., Ferreirastown, Jhb. SINGH, Bhagwath, builder and hardware merchant; b. March 15, 1890, Standerton, Tvl, e s. of late Moonie Singh of Agra, India; educ. Jhb. Govt. Indian School; m. Samiputh, d. of Thirloki, 4 s., 6 d. Formerly in the building industry & earried on bus. as Super Timbers and Wood Industries. Public activities: Chair. Sanathan Veda Dharma Sabha; a keen social and educ. worker. Rec.: Gardening. Address: Bus., 1 Eric Rd., Newlands, Phone 272573; Res., 15 Mayer St., Martindale, Jhb., Phone 273626. SINGH, Balwanth Maijjles, clerk; b. Richmond 1908, s. of Behari Majles Singh; m. Rajkumarie, d. of Ramdayal Singh of Jhb., 3 s., 1 d.; educ. York Road Govt. School, Pmburg. Public activities: Pres. Durnacol Indian F.C.; treas. D.N.C.F.C.; mem. Indian Child Welfare Soc.; actively engaged in social and sporting activities in N. Natal Collieries; mem. N.ILF.A. exec. Rec.: Gardening, soccer. Address: P.O. Durnacol, Dannhauser, Natal. G2 SINGH, Dharamnarian; general agent, commissioner of oaths, sworn translator; b, Johannesburg; s. of Ramdial Singh; educ. Johannesburg Ind. Govt. Sch.; m. Parvati, d. of late Hardew Singh; 4 s., 1 d. Busi- ness: Garage & service station, est. 1955; first Indian to start this business in Johannesburg. Public activi- ties; Founder, Sanathan Ved Dharam Sabha, being its sec. for 10 years; helped to establish Women’s Sec. of the Ved. D. Sabha. Recreation: Played rugby for the All-Blacks for 25 years; football for Sham- rocks F.C.; tennis for Rangers T.C.; pres. and sec. T. Col. Rugby Football Union for five years; manager T.C. rugby team to the Cape, 1946; founder and coach of rugby in Ind. primary and high schools. Sworn Supreme Court translator in Hindustani. Super- vised non-European distribution of newspapers for the C.N.A. for the past 35 years. Made several pilgrimages of temples in India. Address: 14 23rd Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg. SINGH, George, B.A., LL.B.; was on the staff of Sastri College; later qualified as attor- ney, now practising in Durban. Pub. Act.: Very prominent in Sport; Sec. Non-Euro- pean Soccer Federa- tion; Vice-President N.LC.; was also an Estate Agent. Rec.: Angling. Add.: 35 Baker St., Durban. SINGH, Harichunder, traveller; b. Verulam, May 1935, 2nd s. of Hardew; educ. Thornville Govt.- aided Indian School and Dundee High School. Began as shop assistant with Mr. B. S. Singh, later -joined the firm of G. & M. Wholesalers. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Soccer. Address: Bus., 133 First Ave., Durban; Res., c/o T. A. Singh, Thornville Junction, Natal. SINGH, Harry, clerk; b. Mayville, Durban 1921, s. of J. R. Singh; educ. Cator Manor Govt.-aided Indian School; m. d. of D. L. Singh, 2 d., 1 s. Public activities: Vice-pres. of the Good Cheer Fund; mem. Springfield Swimming Club; mem. of the Cultural Instit., Sydenham; is in the employment of the Durban Tattersals since 1940. Rec.: Tennis, cricket, soccer. Address: 16 Viola Rd., Springfield, Durban. SINGH, Ikebel, wholesale merchant and property owner; b. Gujranwala, Punjab, India, Feb. 1901, s. of Sardar Isher Singh; educ. Indian High School, Jhb.; m. Harnaam Kaur Singh, d. of Sardar Chatter Singh, 2 s., 4 d. Est. own bus. as general dealer, also trading as Singh Bros., Wholesale Fruit and Produce Merchants, No. 3, Market Stall, Benoni. Public activities: Patron Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha and Benoni Sports Club; has travelled extensively in India, Pakistan, East Africa; interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Address: P.O. Box 5005, Benoni South, Tvl.

---

## Page 5

208 THE SOUTH AFRICAN SINGH, Jasraj; wholesale merchant; s. of Isherwar Singh; b. Benoni, May 10, 1912; educ. Benoni Col. Govt. School; m. Savithree, d. of Lallbahudur Singh; 1 s., 3 d. Business: Trading as J. Singh Wholesalers, est. 1931. Built the Liberty and the Star Bioscopes for the benefit of non-Europeans. Public activities: Mem. Benoni Hindu Mahasabha; patron Thistle F.C.; interested in all social and educational! matters affecting the Indian community. Address: 171 3rd Avenue, Benoni, Transvaal. SINGH, Inder Be- hari, estate agent; b. April 1916, Umzinto, s. of Behari Singh; educ. Secondary Sch. Est. Estate Agency in 1930. Public activi- ties: Mem. of the Clairwood _ Literary Debating Soc. and the Indian Social Ser- vice; mem. of the Premier Lawn Tennis Club. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Sirdar Rd., Clairwood, Natal. SINGH, Jaydew Nasib, B.A., LL.B.; b. Tugela, Ntl., 1922; educ. Sastri College and Wits.; m. Radha Devi Singh; 2 d. Pub- lic Act.: Was Jt. Sec. of S.A.LC. and Vice- Pres, N.I.C.; one of first two non-Euro- peans to be elected to Wits. S.R.C.; Sec. of Ind. Centenary Cele- bration Committee; represented Ind. com- munity at Group Areas Board hearings and has spoken on various platforms on Ind. question; served a term of imprisonment during Defiance Campaign. Rec.: Amateur Theatricals. Add.: Bus., 25 Baker St., Durban. SINGH, Narain, general dealer; 3rd s. of late Maha- beer Singh of Durban; b. Bellair, Durban, Nov. 30, 1915; m. Phulmathie, 2nd d. of Rampersad Singh of Westville, 2 s., 3 d.; educ. Sea View Govt.-aided Indian School. Est. bus. as general dealer at Mayville, trading as Goodwill Trading Co. In 1949 he built three shops at Coedmore Rd., trading as Coedmore Road Stores (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in community life; has travelled throughout the Union. Rec.: Angling. Address: Bus., Head Office, 118 Coedmore Rd., Bellair, Phone 819098; Res., 72 Deering Rd., Bellair. INDIAN WHO’S WHO SINGH, Kametha Ramchuran, social welfare officer; b. Ladysmith 1918, s. of R. Singh; educ. Ladysmith Govt. Indian School; m. d. of R. Rupai of Estcourt, 3 s., 4d. Was mem. Ladysmith C.C. and Shamrocks F.C.; took an active part in the administration of Klip River Dist. Indian F.A. and Northern Dist. Indian C.U.; vice-pres. Sanathan Dharam Sabha; pres. Ladysmith Deepavali Celebration comm.; pres. Northern Natal Shiksha Sangh; the only social worker covering 23 Magisterial Areas between Mooi River and Charlestown, serving all sections of non- European community; vice-pres. Hindu Cultural Service Soc. Rec.: Gardening, woodwork. Address: 37 Forbes St., Ladysmith, Phone 708; Bus. Phone, 316. SINGH, Parthab, merchant; b. Dec., 1920; y. s. of Isher Singh, of Gujranwala, Punjab, India; educ. Khalasa High School and College; m. Indira, 3rd d. of B. A. Magrajh, of Durban; 2 s., 5 d. Trading as Singh Bros., Wholesale Fruiterers, Public activities: Former pres. and trustee of Hindu Maha Sabha since its inception and laid the foundation stone of Sabha Building; capt. Khalsa High Sch. at hockey and Thistle F.C.; toured India and Pakistan and traversed S.A.; while in India met leading Indian personalities. Rec.: Reading, motoring. Address: 219 3rd Ave., Asiatic Bazaar, Benoni, Tvl. SINGH, Indira, housewife; b. Botanic Villa, Durban; 3rd d. of B. A. Maghrajh; educ, Dartnell Crescent Indian Girls’ High School, Durban; m. Partab Singh, y.s. of late Isher Singh; 2 s., 5 d. Sec. Women’s Indian Club, Indian Women’s Assoc. and Indian Women’s Reading Circle. Toured India with her husband in 1953; met Lady Rama Rao, Sir Rama Rao, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Begaum Liquat Ali Khan and many noted Indian film stars; Lady Rao paid Mrs. Singh eloquent tribute during her visit to the Union; she was also introduced to the Prime Minister of India, Hobby: Needlework. Address: 219 3rd Ave., Benoni, Tvl. SINGH, Peter Mun- gal, bookkeeper; b. Tongaat, Feb. 11, 1912, s. of Bharo Singh; m., 1 s., 2 d5 educ. Tongaat Govt. Indian School. Left Tongaat and took up residence at Mooi River in 1922. Public activities: Pres. Mooi River Springbok F.C.; sec. Mooi River In- dian School Advisory Comm.; was _ sec. ooi River Spring- b F:Gs and a fouhdation mem.; was delegate to the Weenen County I.F.A. since 1932, and later was elected vice-pres., and thereafter made hon. life vice-pres.; was responsible to sponsor scheme for the erection of a school for the Indian community of Mooi River; sec. Mooi River Indian Ratepayers’ THE SOUTH AFRICAN and Tenants’ Assoc.; was a council mem. of the N.LF.A.; rep. W.C.LF.A.; led delegation to Mooi River Town Board on matters pertaining to the Indian community; was a mem. of the N.I.C. (Mooi River Branch); rep. the branch at conferences held by Headquarters (Durban); now a mem. of the N.1.0., was elected delegate to attend conference held at Cape Town by the S.A.I1.0.; one of the trustees of the Mooi River Indian School Trust. Address: P.O. Box 68, Mooi River. SINGH, Rambally, printer; b. Durban 1918; 4th s. of late Duleep Singh of Durban; educ. at Durban; m. Dhanwanthi Devi, d. of late Kandhi Singh of Pmburg., 2 s., 2 d. Entered the printing trade after leaving school; after service with several European firms left the printing trade and est. a florist bus. Public activities: Mem. of the Arya Samaj; inspector of the Indian School; also a teacher at the Aryan Benevolent Home; mem. of the Ratepayers’ Assoc., Mayville; mem. of the West Ridge Social Club; mem. of the Natal Indian Blind Soc. Rec.: Music and singing. Address: 14 Bellair Rd. Mayville, Durban, Phone 448500. SINGH, Ramdial, retired merchant; b. Umzinto, Ntl, 1884, e. s. of Gayadeen Singh of Farakabad, Singerapatnam, India; educ. private studies; m. Rajpathy, d. of Lutchman Singh of India, 2 s., 6 d. Was formerly attached to circulation dept., Central News Agency Ltd., Jhb.; retired in 1948. Public activi- ties: Trustee Sana- than Veda Dharma Sabha, Jhb.; vice- pres. Shahai Mundal, Jhb.; was treas. Colonial-born Settlers Indian Assoc., Jhb.; trustee Hindi Ashram (Clare Estate, Durban). ae 14 23rd St., Vrededorp, Jhb., Phone 2234, SINGH, Ramphal Gagrath, director; b. Umzinto 1920, s. of Ramphal Singh; educ. Clairwood Boys School. Bus.: Director of Piccadilly Bazaar (Pty.) Ltd., branch stores at 47 Jacobs Rd., and 673 South Coast Rd., trading under the style of Billy’s Bazaar (Pty.) Ltd., dealing in the following merchandise, stationery, hardware and patent medicines. Public activities: Mem. of the Clairwood School Old Boys’ Club; Arya Yuvuk Samaj and Ramakrishna Centre. Rec.: Angling. Address: 595 South Coast Rd., Clairwood, Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 209 SINGH, Ramper- sadh, farmer and trader; 0. s. of Gum- bheer Singh of Um- zinto; b. Umzinto, March 10, 1913; m. Gangally, e. d. of Tikum Singh of Um- zinto, 3 s., 5 d.; educ. Umzinto Indian Sch. Inherited father’s farm, also owns another farm “Ridge” at Dumisa, and is also a trader. Public activities: Sec. Um- zinto Sanathan Dharam Sabha; vice- pres. Indian Cane Growers’ Assoc.; mem. School Board and Building Comm.; played leading part in erection of Umzinto High School and is interested in all aspects of community life. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 63, Umzinto, Phones (Bus.), 102; (Res.), 118. SINGH, Gangally; e. d. of Tikum Singh of Umzinto; b. Umzinto, 1917; m. Rampersadh _ Singh, o. s. of Gumbheer Singh of Umzinto, 3 s., 5 d. Takes a keen interest in the uplift- ment of the com- munity; sent her eldest daughter to England for further studies. Address: P.O. Box 63, Um- Bato, Natal, Phone 118. : SINGH, Shamsingh Parbhoo, bookkeeper, sec., land and estate agent; b. Durban, May 30, 1916, 3rd s. of late Parbhoo Singh of Durban; m. Soobadra, d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Parthab Singh of Mt. Edge- combe, 2 s. 1 ds educ. Cato Manor Govt.-aided Indian School. Est. bus. in 1938, now partner in City and Suburban Agencies, 76 Mad- ressa Arcade, Dur- ‘ ban. Public activi- ties: Comm. mem. Mayville Govt.-aided Indian: School Board; comm. mem. Cato Manor Indiam

---

## Page 6

210 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO Cemetery Assoc.; vice-pres. Parades F.C.; donor of trophy to M.E.S. Govt.-aided Indian School for inter- house competition; interested in community’s reli- gious and educ. activities. Address: Bus., 59a and 76 Madressa Arcade, Durban, Phone 22527; Res., 2 Leith Rd., Mayville, Durban. SINGH, Ramphal Parmalik, man. dir.; b. Umzinto on Dec. 25, 1912; e. s. of Cllr. R. Singh, of Elsies River, Cape Town; educ. St. Aidan’s Boys’ School; m. Shyamkumari, 8th d. of late Mr. Ganga- deen Maharaj, of Glencoe; 4 s. Recrea- tion: Gardening. Address: Bus., 138 Umgeni Road, Phone 65151; Res., 93 10th Avenue, Phone 38515, Durban. SINGH, Shyamku- marie; bookkeeper/ typist; b. in Glencoe, Natal, on Nov. 20, 1929; m. R. P. Singh, d. of Gangadeen: educated Glencoe School and _ private study. After leaving school, took private study and completed Nat. Sen. Cert. Joined teaching profession in 1943 at Glencoe School and then at Dundee Government School. Taught for three years and then resigned to get mar- ried. Now settled in Durban and interested in hus- band’s business. Mem. of Red Cross, was Comman- dant of the Junior Division at Dartnell Crescent School. Travelled through whole of England and Continent in 1953 and Mauritius in 1954. Address: 93 10th Avenue, Durban, Phone 38515. SINGH, Sewpal Jugmohan, b. Veru- lam, s. of Sewpal Singh; m. d. of late F, Satyapal; educ. Dayanand Brahm Maha Vidyalaya, Lahore, Punjab, India. Occ.: Insurance rep. and Hindu preacher. Bus.: Assu- rance rep. for Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada. Public activities: Vice-pres. of Veda Dharma Sabha; ex-principal V.D.S. Hindi School for 14 years; vice- pres. Hindi Shiksha Sangh of S.A.; official priest and mem. Arya Prathinidhi Sabha of S.A.; mem. of Hindu Maha Sabha; one of the founders and vice-pres. Hindu United Service Brigade; vice-pres. Deepavali Cheer Soc.; mem. India Ind. Cele. Comm.: chair. Local Comm. Hindi Shiksha Sangh. Travelled extensively in India during college vocational period; qualified as Vidyarathan at Dayanand Brahm Maha Vidyalaya, Lahore, Punjab, India; Pracharak (preacher) of Rastra Bhasha Prachar Simiti Warda, India, for Natal. Address: P.O. Box 640, Pmburg., Phone 23650. —-e SINGH, Krishna- vathie (Mrs. Jug- mohan_ Singh); __ib. Durban, d. of late F. Satyapal; m., 3 s., 3° d.; educ. Wood- lands Indian High School, matriculated in 1940. Public activi- ties: Ex-sec. Child Welfare Soc., Pmburg.; sec. for 8 yrs. Indian Women’s Assoc.; sec. Hindu Stree Samaj; mem. pavali Cheer Soc.; mem. FiOLS.A. Pmburg. Area Care Comm.; mem. St. John Ambulance Brigade; delegate -for Women’s Assoc. to the Nat. Council of Women; mem. India Ind. Cele. Comm. 1947; teacher V.D.S. Hindi Sch.; took a course in shorthand and typing. Address: P.O. Box 640, Pmburg., Phone 23650. THE SOUTH AFRICAN SINGH SIRJIT, Hazura; teacher; s. of Babu Hazura Singh; b. at Germiston on Feb. 26, 1928; educ.: Matriculated Johan- nesburg Ind. High School, studying B.A.; m. Sarah Singh; 4 ch. Qualified day school teacher in Germiston. Public activities: Sec. Hindi School Com-; vice-pres. East Rand Dist. Ind. Football Assn.;Sec. Ind. Sports Board of Control, Germiston; pres. Royal Hearts I.F.C.; pres. Blues Tennis Club; mem, Indo-European Joint Council. Address: Std. 1060, 3rd Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston. SINGH, Sorabjeeth Coomar, building contractor; b. Howick 1899, e. s. of late Sorabjeeth Singh of Durban; m. Ram- peari, d. of Bal Part- hab Singh of Mt. Edgecombe, 2 s., 5 d.; educ. pte. tuition. Est. building contractor’s business in 1[936. Public activities: Vice- pres. Indian Master Builders’ Assoc.; in- terested in affairs of Indian community. Address: Bus., 6 Hoosen’s Buldings, 116 Queen St., Durban; Res., 1215 North Coast Rd., Red Hill, Durban. SOLANKI, Dayabhai Pitamber, wholesale merchant and direct importer; s. of Pitam- ber Vithal; b. at Nav- sari, India, in 1904; educ. Navsari H.S. & Jhb. Ind, School; m. Umba, d. of Bhagvan Naran; 5 s., 2 d. Busi- ness: Solanki Bros., est. 1935. Two sons in own business. For three years chairman S. A. Kshatriya Man- dal. Mem. Hindu C.C. Address: 198 Market Street, Johannesburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 211 SINGH, Woodraj Sookdeo; business- man; b. Mayville, Durban, on July 25, 1925; s. of Sookeo Singh; educ. A. Y. School and Ind. Tech- nical Inst.; m. Shanti- devi, 3rd d. of Mrs. and late Hanoman Singh, of Clairwood,; 3 s. 1 d. Business: Manager late father’s businesses — Singh’s Mutton Market; Singh’s Cash Butch- ery, Indian Market. Head office: 133 War- wick Avenue, Durban. Public activities: Donated classroom to M. L. Sultan Technical College; donated Ward to St. Aidan’s Hos- pital in mem. of father, known as “B. Sookdeo Ward”: life mem. Springfield Hindu Sabha; patron, N.I. Tennis Assoc., Mayville Youth Club, Arya Samaj, Cato Manor and Premier Tennis Clubs; awarded bursaries to Natal University (Ind. section) and A.Y.S. School; donated to the Sanathan Dharma Sabha Building Fund and to several other institutions. Recreation: Fishing, tennis, billiards. Mem. Spes Bona Tennis Club. Address: Bus., 133 Warwick Avenue (head office); Res., 455 Jan Smuts Highway, Mayville, Durban. SOLANKI, Hiralal Pitamber, wholesale merchant and direct importers; s.o. Pitam- ber Vithal; b. Navsari H.S., India; m. Vajia, after her death, m. Parvathi; 6 s. 7 d. Business: Solanki Bros., 198 Market St., Jhb. For five years treas. S.A. Kshatriya Mandal. Address: 198 Market Street, Jhb. SOMA, Dawood, hairdresser; b. Inchapor, dist. Surat, e. s. of Soma Hassan; m. e. d. of Goolab Jamal of Surat. Arrived S.A. 1925, after private employment took over father’s business, trading under the name of D. S. Hassan. Visited India 1930, returned 1931. Mem. of Khalifa Soc.; takes keen interest in the affairs of Muslim community. Rec.: Singing, expert tubla player. Address: Bus., Res., 112 Hanover St., Cape Town.

---

## Page 7

212 THE SOUTH AFRICAN SOLANKI, Shanti- lal Dayabhai, garage proprietor; b. Oct. 19, 1929, 2nd s. of D. Solanki; educ. Fordsburg Indian School, College of Aeronautics, India, and Engineering Col- lege, London; m. Damayatiben, d. of H. R. Kapitan of Jhb. Set up business Shanty’s Garage and Service Station. Public activities: Asst. sec. Transvaal Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; asst. treas. Chatriya Mandal. Has travelled extensively in United King- dom, South and East Africa. Rec.: Table tennis. Address: Bus., 71 Bree St., Newtown, Jhb., P.O. Box 2740; Res., 22 Market St., Phone 342647. + SOMA, Vallabh, b. Matavad, Dist. Surat, 1910; educ. Matavad. Came to South Africa 1912, settled at Johan- nesburg. First in em- ployment, later started own business as mer- chant tailor, first in Johannesburg, now in Jeppe. Public activi- ties: Rteas. Koli Hit- vardhak Mandal; sec. Transvaal Tailor Em- ployers’ Assn.; in 1929 during the civil dis- obedience movement, led by Mr. Gandhi acted as treas. of the fund to aid the movement in Jalapur. Visited India twice during recent years. Address: 311 Commis- sioner Street, Jeppe, Johannesburg. SOMIAH, Appalsamy; b. Durban, April 14, 1919, e. s. of S. Somiah of Durban; m. Gairamma, d. of late Bungar Chetty of Durban, 4 s., 4 d.; educ. Stella Hill School, M. L. Sultan Technical College. Worked in several places; joined the staff of King Edward VIII Hospital in 1952; qualified as male nurse in Nov., 1956. Public activities: Mem. of Subramoniar Temple; mem. Tamil School, Cato Manor; keenly interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Interest: Religious Work. Address: King Edward VIII Hospital; Res., 105 Montille Rd., Mayville, Phone 56131. INDIAN WHO’S WHO SONI, Gapaljee Damiee, merchant; b. Pmburg., Mar. 23, 1914; s. of Damjee Karsamjee; m. d. of late Soni Madevjee Poonja; 6 s., 3 d.; educ, Woodlands Indian High School. Trading as D. K. Soni, 76 Church St., Pmburg., and Ritewear Fashions, 76a Church St., Pmburg. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 76 Church St., Pmburg., Phone 23277; Res., 132 West St., Pmb. SONDAY, Shaik Dawood, merchant; b. Karsai, Kolaba, Bombay, e¢. s. of Noonoomia Sonday; educ. at Karsai; m. Hajee Mariam. Came to S.A. in 1901, at the age of 19, and est. bus. in Kimberley. Arrived in Cape Town in 1927, settled in Elsies River; est. general dealers bus.; retired from bus. in 1956. Visited India several times; takes keen interest in social and religious work. Address: 276 Klipfontein Rd., Elsies River, Cape Town, Phone 989483. SONI, Jeram Prem- jee; manuf. jeweller; b. Tarsai, Kathiawad, India, 1908; 2nd s. of late Premjee Jetha; m. d. of Popatlal Kara, merchant, of Durban; 4 s.; educ. Tarsai, India. Came to South Africa in 1924 and settled with parents in Durban. Joined father’s busi- ss of manufacturing jeweller; on father’s death took over busi- nes. interests in 1928. Trading at present in his own’ name. Is assisted by his two brothers, Vithaldas and Valabdas. Public activities: Mem. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj and Patni Soni Assn. Address: Bus., 88 Vic- toria Street, Durban, Phone 23983; Res., 24 North Street, Durban, Phone 28528. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 213 SONI, Mooljee Hir- jee, merchant jewel- ler, e. s. of late Soni Hirjee Ramjee; b. Gedbagasvra, Kathia- war, India in 1905; m. at Sagrass, Kathia- war to 2nd d. of Monjee Visvram of India, 2 s., 1 d.; educ. Gedbagasvra, India. Came to this country in 1918 and settled in Durban; est. bus. in 1926 as merchant jeweller, trading as Mayfair Jewellers; A later extended to in- clude pawnbroker’s dept. One son, Amvathal, is studying law in England. Public activities; Was foundation mem. and sec. of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; laid foundation stone of Kalabhoovam in Rajkot, India in 1948, to enable youth of that province to learn the jewellery and watchmaking trades; sec. of Girnana Gnalti Hit- warthak Mundal. Toured East Africa and India extensively in 1948. Student of vernacular religion. Address: Bus., 169a Grey St., Durban, Phone 20765; Res., 2 Lutman Ave., Durban, Phone 67692. SONI, Odhavjee Mav- jee, manufacturing jeweller and general dealer; b. Umzinto, Sept. 1914, e. s. of M. Devjee; educ. at Higher Grade School and Sastri College; m. Dhanbai, d. of P. Soni of Stanger, 2 s., 1 d. Bus.: Est. manu- facturing jeweller and general dealer in 1937; specialises in diamonds; conducts wholesale and retail business. Public activities: Sec. of Natal Indian Manu- facturing Jewellers Assoc.; one of the foundation mems. and vice-pres. of the Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj, and Kathiawad Govt.-aided Indian School; active mem. of the N.LC.; former mem. of the Exec. Council of the N.LC.; was exec. mem. of the India League (S.A.); exec. mem. of the Liberal Study Group; hon. mem. of the Durban Indian Surf Life Saving Club. Rec.: Swimming. Club.: Inter- national Club. Address: Bus., 218 Grey St., Durban, Phone 27910; Res., 6 Cromer Rd., Durban. SOOBIAH, Lutchmee, nurse; b. Durban, Dec. 16, 1937, 4th d. of late Rungasamy; educ. Durban Indian Girls High School. Took up nursing on Jeaving school. Public activities: Mem. of the Girl Guides Assoc. Hobbies: Collects film star photos, music, pen pals. Address: Bus., St. Aidan’s Mission Hospital; Res., 72 Beatrice St., Durban. SONI, Tapoo Kheraj, jeweller; b. Durban, e. s. of K. Dhuram- see; educs Tongaat Govt.-aided’ School; m. Santhok, d. of V. Nursee, Pmburg., 3 s., 4d. Est. bus. in 1930, trading at T. K. Soni, Manufacturing Jlrs., Engraver and General Dealer; specialist in executing customers own design. Public activities: Treas. of the Gujerati Cultural 5 Soc.; mem. of the Pe Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj. Address: Bus., 50 Carlisle St., Durban, Phone 28829; Res., 46 Carlisle St., Durban. SOOBHAW, _ Baha- dur, restauranteur; b. Isipingo, Dec. 12, 1912, 2nd s. of Soo- bhaw; m. Soominthra, d. of Dowlay Kam- beran of Sydenham, Cie te ckLoe ec Kek Isipingo Govt.-aided Indian School. Com- menced bus. as a fresh produce dealer and now expanded same into a restaurant. Public activities: Comm. mem. of Isipingo Indian Soc.; chair. of com. of Isipingo Hindi Classes: mem. of Bhajan Mandal; patron of Isipingo Indian F. and C.C.; mem. of Isipingo Darts Club. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 11, Isipingo, Phone 211. SOOBIAH, J. T., b. Malvern, April 25, 1912; s. of Joe Soobiah; educ. Fort Hare University; m. d. of G. B. Chetty, prop. Std. Cigar Co., Durban; 2 s., 2 d. Trading as Joe Soobiah’s, Potato Merchants, Pmburg. Municipal Market. Public activities: W/comm. mem. N.I.O., Pmb. branch; patron Y.N.F.C. and Y.N.C.C.; vice-chair. Pmb. Thirukootam. Sporting activ.: Played soccer, rugby, athletics and tennis at Fort Hare University and Pmburg.; playing mem. Allandale Tennis Club; broke 100 & 200 yds. records at Fort Hare University, 100 yds. in 9.4/5 sec. & 220 yds. in 22.3/5 sec.; played rep. soccer and rugby for Fort Hare University and Lovedale Club. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 3 Gertrude St., Pmburg., Phones: Bus., 25953; Res., 23750.

---

## Page 8

214 THE SOUTH AFRICAN SOOBRAM ONEY, Kullen, funeral dir.; b. Pmburg, Sept. 1916; educ. York Road Govt. Indian School, Pmburg.; m. Kunniamma, 3rd d. of Mr. P. Moonsamy of Inanda, 1 s., 2 d. Public activities: Started public career at age of 16; organis- ing sec. S.A. Colonial- born and_ Settlers’ Assoc.; joint hon. sec. C.B. and S.J. Assoc. (Pmburg. Branch), 1933-1939, comm. mem. Pmburg. Aryan Benevolent Soc.; mem. Indo-European Joint Council; ex-comm. and mem. H.Y.M.A.; vice-pres. Pentrich Indian Y.M.A.; comm. mem. Pmburg, In- dian Unemployment Relief Comm. 1937; rep. Pmburg. Indian Social Service Comm., under chair- manship of the Mayor, on occasion of the Coronation of their Majesties in 1937; one of two consultative members of the Indian community on the Social Services of S.A. (Pmburg. Branch) 1937 and 1938; King's Coronation Celebration comm. mem. (Indian section) 1938; appeared on the deputation of the C.B. and S.I.A. (Pmburg. Branch) before S.A. Police Comm. of Enquiry; hon. sec. Natal Liquor and Catering Trades Employees’ Union (Pmburg. Branch); councillor M.D.I.F.A. 1933-38; actg. sec. M.D.LF.A. in 1937; hon. sec. and treas. Schools F.C. (Pmburg.) 1936-1938; councillor M.D.I.C.U. 1937; vice-pres. Natal Indian Youth Council; asst. organising sec. Durban Indian Municipal Employees Soc.; mem. Durban Indian Club; assisted in the inauguration of Indian Child Welfare Societies at Verulam, Stanger, Newcastle and Dundee in 1939; appeared with various deputations to Govt., Provincial and Munici- pal authorities; comm. mem. N.I.A. Address: Bus., 69 Beatrice St., Durban, Phones 62395/20914; Res., 23 View St., Overport, Durban, Phone 882278. SUBRAMANY, Thimbeeran, land & estate agent; b. Isi- pingo, Nov. 6, 1904, Sth s. of late Thim- beran of Isipingo; m. d. of late Chinnien of Clairwood, 1 s., 5 d.; educ. Isipingo Govt.-aided Indian School. Started as a dairyman in 1920; joined the firm of African Explosives in 1928, after 20 years est. land and estate bus.; appointed Com- missioner of Oaths in 1948. Public activities: Asst. sec. for Isipingo Indian Soc. for 28 years; sec. Isipingo Govt.-aided Indian School Comm. INDIAN WHO’S WHO for 15 years; pres. Isipingo Dist. I.F.A.; sec./treas. Isipingo Dist. 1.F.A. for 16 years; pres. for 4 years since inception, of Isipingo Dist. Indian C.U.; founder and hon. sec. Isipingo Tamil School; ex-mem. Durban Indian Benevolent Soc.; mem. Durban Indian Child Welfare Soc.; mem. of F.O.S.A.; was sec. of Isipingo Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; mem. of comm. of school meals service since inception; auditor Reunion Bajan Mundal; mem. Isipingo Estate Vishnu Temple; vice-pres S.C.D.1.F.A. and S.C.D.LC.U.; a_ keen sportsman, has donated a number of trophies to various sporting bodies and schools. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 15, Isipingo, Phone 543; Res., Thiel Rd., Isipingo, Phone 543. SUBRAMONEY, Monisami; bookseller; b. King’s Rest, Dur- ban, June 3, 1910; s. of Munisami; educ. in Durban; m.; 5s., 3 d. Worked for the Shell Company and after- wards as salesman for the Radio Record Trading Co. for 16 years. Went to India in 1948. Business: Bookseller, dealing in Tamil books, school books, stationery and Indian records, est. in 1953, trading as M. Subramoney. Public activities: Co-founder S.S.S. Society, King’s Rest; organised and conducted King’s Rest Tamil School; Tamil teacher since 1925: co-founder of the Thiruk- kural Society; patron of many educational and musical bodies; interested in Tamil education and culture and in other religious activities and organisa- tions. Address: Bus., Room 10, fi7e Victoria Street; Box 2343, Durban. SUBROYEN, Kogila, nurse; b. Vryheid, Dec. 18, 1935, 2nd d. of R. G. Subroyen; educ. Indian Girls’ High School. Took up nursing on leaving School. Public activities: Mem. of St. John Ambulance Brigade; passed Ist Aid Exam. in 1954. Rec.: Tennis, music, netball, pen pals. Address: Bus., St. Aidan’s Mission Hospital; Res., 804 Aziz Crt., Newlands, Durban. SULEMAN, Cassim Hajee, general merchant; b. Durban 1920, y. s. of Hajee Boor of Isipingo; m. Mariam, d. of Joosub Yacoh of Stanger, 3 s., 3 d.; educ. Higher Grade School ‘and Sastri College. Est. bus. in Moorleigh Rd., Bellair in 1946; later est. bus. North Bank Rd.; during riots of 1948, suffered total loss; under the Corp. relief he was able to est. South Road Supply Stores and a butchery at Jacobs Road. Public activities: 1953 visited Mecca, Kenya, Abyssinia, Asmara and Saudi THE SOUTH AFRICAN Arabia. Interest: Religious literature. Address: Bus., 12 Sparks Rd., Overport, Phone 884617; 226 Jacobs Rd., Rossburgh; Res., 12 Sparks Rd., Overport, Durban. SULEMAN, Ma- homed Jakaria, manu- facturers’ repres.; b. in Durban on June 5, 1917; e. s. of late Suleman Tayob, of Merebank, Jodiya, Kathiawar, India; m. Khadija, 2nd d. of late Abdool Gani Mitha, of Jalia Devani, India; 5 s., 1 d. After leaving sch. joined Messrs. A. K. Hoosen, timber mer- chants, and later was managing director of Hoosen’s Timber & Trading Co. until it was disposed of; then joined Messrs. Edward Wood- hams & Co., mnfrs.’ repres., as representing their in- terest as sole Indian agt.; was founder & sec. of Dbn. Memon Association and the Natal Memon Associa- tion; while in India was secretary of Jodiya Young Men’s Memon Society; was com. mem. of Natal Muslim Council. His eldest son; Ebrahim, completed the Holy Koran at the age of five years. Recreations: Reading, educational and religious studies. Club: Bridgeview, Durban North. Address: Bus., Box 57, 80 Yorkshire House, Field Street, Durban, Phone 21676; Res., Flat 5, Aziz Mansions. 101 Queen Street, Durban. SULEMAN, Maho- med Limbada; s. of Mahomed Ismail Lim- bada (Patel); b. in India. Came to South Africa in 1922; educ. Stanger Ind. School and Higher Grade Govt. School, Dur- ban. Proceeded to India in 1932 where he studied account- ancy and other com- mercial courses. Re- turned to South Africa in 1935. Served several wholesale firms in Durban as_ book- keeper and gen. clerk. Address: Res., 5/17 Saville Street, Phone 24679 (Postal address c/o P.O. Box 86) Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 215 SULEMAN, Shaik, clothing manufacturer; b. Durban, 1923, s. of late Shaik Amod (Bob), Clairwood; educ. at Clairwood Indian Govt.-aided School; m., 3 s., 1 d. After leaving school was employed at Beldina Clothing Factory; est. own bus. in 1948, trading as Eve’s Clothing Manufacturers, Clairwood. An active worker for the welfare of the Muslim community. Rec.: Fishing and billiards. Address: Bus., 126 Horsham Rd., Clairwood, Phone 818057; Res., 122 Horsham Rd., Clairwood, Phone 816119. SULIMAN, A. B., merchant; b. Pietersburg 1925. Bus. Est. by late father 1920, now trading as Abdulla Suliman & Co. Keen on sport, soccer and tennis. Address: Box 131, 27 Market St., Pietersburg. SULIMAN, Cassim, general merchant; b. Verulam, 1884, s. of Cassim Suliman; m. Iyasha, d. of Buckusa, 1 s.; educ. Ladysmith Govt. Indian School. Controlling bus. his father est. at Charlestown in 1893. Public activities: Responsible for the building of the Mosque; takes interest in the welfare of the Indian school; was closely assoc. with the late Mahathma Gandhi’s movement; met him in 1897 and 1913; was friend of Agent-General for India, Sir Saffat Ahmed Khan. Address: P.O. Box 70, Charles- town, Natal. SULIMAN, Ebrahim Muhummed, businessman; b. Colenso, Dec. 10, 1912, s. of Muhummed Suliman; m. Aminia Nabie, d. of Nabie Bacus, 2 s., 4 d.; educ. Colenso. Began as a farm hand, lorry driver, mechanic, electrician and fruit hawker; now controls the well-known firm of Suliman’s Fruit Bazaar. Public activities: Donated £300 towards the repairs of the Estcourt Mosque in 1953 and supervised all work personally; in 1955 donated a sum of money towards building of religious hall for spiritual educ.; trustee and treas. of the Madressa Islamia Trust; trustee Muslim Cemetery; takes keen interest in affairs of the Indian community of Estcourt. Add- ress.: Harding St., Estcourt, Phone 67. SULLIMAN, Essack Hassin, furniture dealer; b. Rajkot, India, s. of Essack Hassin; m. Isyha, d. of Sydi Kara, 1 s., 4 d.; educ. Dundee Govt.-aided School. Took over Essack’s Furniture Store. from father in 1945. Public activities: Played soccer for United F.C.; vice-pres. Dundee U.F.C.; was comm. mem. for Dundee Mosque and Madressa Islamic Trust; keenly interested in the public life of the community. Rec.: Motor cycling. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 157, Dundee, Phone 423; Res., 39 Colley St., Dundee, Phone 617. SURTEE, Suleman Essop, general merchant; b. Rustenburg, Tvl., March 12, 1926, y. s. of late E. E. Surtee of Bosspruit; educ. Govt. Indian School, Jhb. Joined brother’s bus. on leaving school; now one of the directors of Surtee’s Silk Store (Pty.) Ltd., branch at Market Street, Jhb. Rec.: Tennis and cricket. Address: Bus., 25 14th St., Vrededorp, Jhb., P.O. Box 7973, Phone 351612.

---

## Page 9

216 THE SOUTH AFRICAN TABHA, Nathoo, wholesale merchant (hardware); b. Kath- iawad, India 1896; educ. in India and S.A. Arrived in S.A. in 1911, re-visited India in 1916, and returned in 1917 with late Manilal & Ramdass Gandhi. Public activities: Was responsible for the erection of a school in Jodya (India) and for his gesture he was hon- oured by the people of Jodya, at a special reception; he is presently building a Mundal in Jodya; chair. and trustee of the Jodya Kathiawad Charitable Trust; vice-pres. of the S.A.H.M.S. and Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj, also treas. of the Durban Samaj Service; was vice-pres. of the Arya Prathinidi Sabha; at present is mem. of the Planning and General purposes comm.; comm. mem. of the Hindu Crematorium and India Independence Celebration; vice-pres. of the Bharath Republic Day Festival. Address: Bus., 107 Queen St., Durban, Phones 24647, 62123; Res. 193 Warwick Ave. (Nathoo Tabha Building), Durban, Phone 6086S. TAMBAY, Hoosain Gafoor, general mer- chant; b. Kargie, Rat- Nagiri, Bombay, India 1915; educ. Cape Town and India; m., ! s. Came to S.A. in 1927, was assoc. with father’s bus.; est. own bus. in 1939, trading as Coronation Grocer; managing dir. of G. B. Bazaar (Pty.) Ltd. Visited India in 1947, returning in 1949. Public activities: Mem. of Cape Penin- sular Traders’ Assoc.; mem. of Habibyia Moslem Educational Instit.; mem. of Muslim Hospital Welfare Soc.; chair. Kargie Muslim Educational Soc.; treas. of Ward 8 Peoples action organisation; exec. mem. of Hidayatull Mosque Kensington; takes part in all Indian public affairs. Address: Bus. and Res., llth Ave., 3rd Street, Windermere, Cape Town, Phone 53244. TAVARIA, Manekshaw Jivanjee, merchant; b. Navsari, India, 1898, 3rd s. of late Jivanji Tavaria; educ, Johannesburg; m. d. of Dinshaw Todiwalla, of Surat, India, 2 s., 3 d. Connected with bus. since 1910; also bookkeeper and commission agent. Public activities: Secretary, Tranvaal Indian Congress INDIAN WHO'S WHO (Springs branch); treasurer, Transvaal Indian F.A., 1919-29; founder-manager, Stella F.C.; played cricket for All-India and Ottomans; played for Standard F.C. and Universal Tennis Club; was president Villas F.C.; patron Far East Rand Dist. Indian F.A.; takes leading part in sporting and other activities in Springs. Address: Stand 1770, Asiatic Bazaar, Springs, Transvaal. Phone 561805. TAVARIA, Kooverji Jivanji, merchant; b. Navasari City 1893, e. s. of late Jivanji Edolji Tavaria; m. Aimai, 3rd d. of late Dosabhay _ Sorabjee Bodhanwalla, 4 5s. 2 d. Public activities: vice-chair. Jhb. Indian Social Welfare; was a mem. of _ the S.A.L.C. delegation to India in 1946; appointed trustee of Varlima Trust Fund, created by late puny Mahatma Gandhi in 1913; was exec. mem. of the T.I.C. for the last 25 years (also its former body T.B.1.A.); rep. Transvaal at various conferences of the S.A.LC., also a mem. of several deputations; was founder of the International Club and _ its treas.; mem. of the Orient Club; held official position in sporting bodies; founded the [Indian Workers Union (1920), was also its treas. (resigned 1924); took active part during Paddison deputation in presenting Ind. case; family closely assoc. with Mahatma Gandhi; whilst his stay in South Africa (Tvl.), acted as pte. sec. to late Mrs. Sarojini Naidu during her trip in the Tvl. Address: 18b Bree St., Fordsburg, Jhb.; 1 Kort St., Jhb., Phone 333716. TAVARIA, Rustom Kooverjee, business manager; b. Jhb. 1919, y. s. of K. J. Tavaria; educ. Jhb.; m. 1s. Was assoc. with Elephant Trad- ing Co.; joined Bom- bay Exporters and C. Master & Co.. Est. own bus. as Tavaria Bros. in Bombay; was a partner in the firm of Unity Trader dis- tifutor in 1947. Ip lic activities: Was sec. of the Star of India. C.C.; also sec. of the Parsi Assoc., presently employed at Messrs. Klener Bros., 174 Market St. Rec.: Cricket. Address: 18b Bree St., Fordsburg, Jhb., Phone 228861. THE SOUTH AFRICAN TAYOB, Ismaili Hoosen; merchant; b. Khilos, India, in 1897; s. of Hoosen Tayob; educ. Stanger Ind. School; m. Amena, e. d. of Abdullah of Malvern, Natal; 2 s., 1d. Business: Whole- salers and retailers. Joined business of his father in 1922, est. in 1900. Public activities: Vice-chairman, Stan- ger Islamic Madressa Society. Interested in several educational! and religious activi- ties. Went to Mecca on pilgrimage in 1947. Address: Bus., 73 Couper Street. Stanger, Phone 53; Res., cnr. Hill Crescent and Victory Roads, Phone 209, Stanger. TEEWARIE SATNARAIN, Balkaran, clothing manufacturer; b. Durban; e. s. of late Balkaran Teewarie of Durban; m. Chundravalie; 4 s., 3 d; educ. St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham. Prop. Victory Clothing Factory established in 1945, at 64 Blink- bonnie Road, Mayville, Durban. Toured the Union of South Africa with his family, also India in 1951. Address: 64 Blinkbonnie Road, Mayville, Durban, Phone 882595; Res., 77 Villa Rd., Mayville, Durban. TEEWARIE, Shardanand Lutchmanarain, company director; b. Stanger, May 9, 1933, 3rd s. of Mr. and Mrs. Lutchmanarain of Stanger; m. d. of Mr. and Mrs. Satnarain Teewarie of Mayville, Durban; educ. Stanger Indian High School. Is a dir. of Victory Clothing Factory, Mayville. Keen sportsman, cricket. Address: Bus., 64 Blinkbonnie Rd., Mayville; Res., 77 Villa Rd., Mayville, Durban, Phone 882595. THAKURDIN, Ram- harak; storekeeper (gen. dlIrs.); b. Rich- mond, Natal, Sept. 30, 1921; s. of Thak- urdin; educ. up to Std. VI; m., 3s., 1 d. Business: Prop. Merri- vale Central Store, est. 1945; owns also Merrivale Orchard Farm and Fresh Pro- duce; Mineral Waters and Refreshment Room Keepers, Merri- vale, Natal; was part- ner of the firm J. Patraj & Co. till Dec., 1946; formed com- pany with two brothers known as R. Thakurdin Bros. (Pty.) Ltd., in 1948, and was its managing director till Dec., 1952. Visited S. and N. Rhodesia. Nyasaland and P.E. Africa in 1952. Keenly interested in social and educational matters and has given INDIAN WHO'S WHO 217 generously to these causes. Mem. of N.L.C.; Natal Veda Dharma Sabha; trustee and treas. Howick West Ind. School; chairman of advisory Board, Howick West. Trustee and President of the Howick West & District Indian Educational Society; Sole Proprietor of the Modern £20,000 Cosmo Theatre & Cosmo Cafe at Howick West. Interested in physical culture, cricket and hiking. Address: P.O. Merrivale, Natal, Phone 194 Howick. THAJMOON, Mansoor Abdul Gafoor, salesman, traveller; b. Durban, Nov. 19, 1932, 3rd s. of Abdul G. Thajmoon; educ. Greyville Govt.-aided School. Employed as salesman by M. Ismail of Umgeni Rd. Joined M. M. Paruk of Durban as salesman. Public activities: Sec. and vice-chair. Greyville C.C.; sec. Greyville F.C.; was selected to play for Natal in tournament at Jhb. in 1954-55. Address: Bus., 339 Pine St., Durban; Res., Flat 2/3, 245 Umgeni Rd., Durban, Phones 29874, 25885. THAKURDIN, K. Champawathie; store- keeper; b. Sans Sousi, May 23, 1933; d. of D. R. Brijmohan; m., 3 s., 1 d. Entered in business as a direc- tor in the firm of R. Thakurdin Bros. (Pty) Ltd., in 1950, and is now a partner in the firm of Merrivale Central Stores, Merri- vale, Natal. Mem. of Veda Dharma Sabha, Natal. Interested in all social and welfare work. Takes part in physical culture and hiking. Address: P.O. Merrivale, Natal, Phone 194, Howick. THOMAS, Ephraim; school master; b. Pmburg. 1893; s. 0. the Rev. John Thomas, first Indian Methodist minister in South Africa; educ. at York Road Govt. School; m. Eleanor, d. of A. H. Peters, of Pmburg; | d., Doris Grace; obtained the Senior Indian Teachers’ Certificate; served under father at the Methodist Indian School; entered Govt. service in 1914, at Depot Road Indian School. In 1915 was promoted Principal of the Ladysmith Indian School; in 1921, was transferred to Mitchell Crescent School; 1929 took over the Higher Grade School from Mr. Wilson; 1939 was appointed

---

## Page 10

218 THE SOUTH AFRICAN Principal of the Greyville Govt. Indian School. Re- tired from the profession in 1949. Public activities: One of the founders of the N.LT.S.; was secretary and president; founded the Durban & District Indian Schools’ Association; was president for three years; controlled the scout movement of the N.LT.S.; appeared before the scout committee to seek recog- nition; was secretary of the Teachers’ Reception Com- mittee for the Prince of Wales’ visit to South Africa in 1927; in charge of the children’s celebration when late King George the VI visited Durban; was also presented to the Royal Family; was in charge of the refugee camp at the Greyville School after the 1949 Native Riot; was president of the Christian Indian Association; was circuit steward of the Methodist Indian Mission for 15 years; was a well known cricketer and soccerite in his younger days; captained the Natal Indian team in the Sam China Cup Tour- nament in the year 1926, staged at Port Elizabeth, and brought the trophy to Natal for the first time; one of the founders of the Indian Eistedfodd; visited India in 1933. Address: 21 Lansdell Ave., Durban, Phone 67208. TILLY, Yusuf Mohamed; merchant; s. of Mohamed Essop Tilly; b. in Klerksdorp in 1914; educ. Gaddialla High School, Kathor, India; m. Aisha, d. of Ebrahim Mohamed Kajee. Business. Central Cash Store, est. 1942. Mem. Transvaal Ind. Congress, one- time branch sec. at Krugersdorp; sec. Bugersdorp Mosque and Madressa Committee; mem. Krugers- dorp Billiard Club. Address: 196a Commissioner Street, Krugersdorp. TIMOL, Cassim Mahomed, commercial agent; b. Heidelberg, Transvaal 1917, s. of Hajee Mohamed Timol; educ. Aligharh University, India; m. Zubeida, d. of M. C. Desai of Pardekop, 2 s. Est. bus. in 1945; formerlly assoc. with V. Gokul & Co. of Jhb. (6 years); founder of Indian Shop Assistants’ Union, Tvl., and was pres. for 6 years; took active part in S.A. Indian Affairs 1940-47; travelled extensively in India. Address: 33 Park Lane, Fordsburg, Tvl. TOOLA, Suleman Ismail; dealer in motor spares; b. June 15, 1908, in Durban, Natal; 2nd s. of I. A. Toola; educ.. Clair- wood Senior Ind. School and Higher Grade Ind. School. Durban; m. e. d. of M. Peer, Durban; 5 s, 3d. Business: Prop. City Motor Spares & Accessories. Public activities: Pres. ae Standard C.C.; ex- pees” . vice-pres. S.C. Cricket Cette . : - 4 Union. Interested in all community move- ments. Address: Bus., 38-40 Alice Street, phone 23014, Durban; Res., 159 Welfreer Road, Phone 87124, Fynnland, Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO UKABHAI, Bhana; merchant tailor; b. Matvad, Dist. Surat, 1900; e. s. of Bhana Bhagvan; m., 3 s., 1 d.; educ. Matvad. Came to South Africa in 1912, settled in Johannesburg. Started own business as merchant tailor in 1925, trading as B. Ukabhai, merchant tailor. Public activities: Former chairman of Kantha Vibhag Committee; a generous donor to all charitable appeals. Address: 313a Commissioner Street, Phone 24-1844, Jeppe, Johannesburg. VAHED, Abdul Kader Ismail, B.A., LL.B.; educ. Sastri, N.U.C. and Wits.; m. Zubeida; 2 s.. 2 d.; served his Articles with a European firm in Johannes- burg. Rec.: Angling. Add.: West End House, Grey St., Durban. VAID, Ismail Amod, director of company; b. at Durban 1924, e. s. of A. I. Vaid of Durban; educ. at Westville Govt.-aided Indian School and Sastri College, Durban; m. Amina, d. of S. M. Lockhat. Bus.. Was assoc. with father’s bus., now dir. of wholesale and retail bus., trading under the style of A. I. Vaid. Has visited England and the Conti- nent. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 152 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 27676; Res., Jan Smuts Highway, Westville, Durban, Phone 84224. VALJEE, Mohanlal, jeweller, 2nd s. of Soni Valjee Nathoo of India; b. Gingri, Kathiawad, India, Jan. 25, 1910; m. Ojam Vallabh, e. d. of V. D. Soni of Durban, 7 s., 4 ds; educ. St. Anthony’s Govt.-aided and Higher Grade Schs., Durban. Took over father’s jewellery manufacturing -_ bus. in 1926 and built up a flourishing trade. Public activities: Trustee Kathiawad Patri Soni Assoc., and patron Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; is a foundation donor of M. L. Sultan Technical College, Durban. Visited India in 1925. Address: Bus., 112 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 24085; Res., 13 Bond St., Durban. if VALLABH, Soma; master wt s. of Vallabh Bhana; b. in Baroda State, India; educ. Benoni Col. Govt. School; m. Devi, d. of Jivan Bhana. Business known as: Baroda Master Tailors, also as. American Tailors. Mem. of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj and Transvaal Ind. Congress. Mem. of the Vredons F.C. and Hindu C.C. Address: 293 Commissioner Street, Jeppe, Johannesburg. 360 Albert Rd., Woodstock VALJEEBHAI, Lal- bhai, general dealer; b. Bodali, Dist. Surat, India, in 1933; s. of Valjeebhai Bhana- bhai; educ. in Tvl.; m. Gangooben, d. of Ukabhat Valjabhai; educ. in Tvl. Business: Bhana Hira & Son. Arrived with mother in S.A. in 1934 and settled in the Trans- vaal. Address: P.O. Box 27, Settlers Dist., Warmbaths, Tvl. VALLABHBHATI, Baloobhai, tailor; b. at Kadod, Surat Dist., India in 1921, s. of Vallabhbhai Kanjee- bhai; educ. in India; m. Laxmiben, d. of Chhitabhai Laloo, 2 s. 4 d. Est. bus, known as Golden City Tailors 1946. Came to S.A. in 1935 and settled in the Tvl. Mem. Tvl. United Mochi Soc.; ex-comm. mem. T.H. Seva Samaj. Interested in cricket. Address: la Plein St., Jhb., Phone 227318. VALLIE, Ahmed Suleman, hairdresser, b. at Woodstock; e. s. of Suleman Valtie; educ. Saltriver; m, in India dist. Surat, in 1937; 5 s., 2 d.; after leaving school was engaged in father’s business; took over 1939, trading under the name of Liberty De-Luxe Hairdresser. Visited India several times. Pub. activities: Chairman of Surtee Youth Society; mem. of Orient Sports Club. Rec.: Soccer. Add.: , Phone 53937. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 219 VALLIE, Hassen Suleman, hairdresser; b. Woodstock, Cape Town; y. s. of Suleman Vallie; educ. at Salt River School; m. d, of Adam Bhika, of Mombasa. Visited India several times. Presently conducting bus. in partnership. with eldest brother. Public activities: Sec. of the United Football Assoc.; chair of the Orient Football Team 1936-56; mem. of the Surtee Youth Soc.; mem. of the Fund Raising Comm. and also exec. mem. of same. Rec.: Soccer and cricket. Address: 360 Albert Rd., Woodstock, Cape Town. VALLY, Safari Bagus, retired busi- nessman; b. Tankeria, Barouch, India, s. of Bagus; educ. Barouch School, India; m. Ameena, d. of Bapu Ishmail; 5 s. 1 d. Ex - prop. Kohinoor Cafe, est. 1928. Ex- chair, Kanamia Assn. for 15 years; ex-vice- pres. Muslim League; chair. Tankaria Mad- ressa, Barouch, India; gave res. in Tankaria for use as high school; Mootvalli of Kerk St. Mosque; travelled extensively in India and Africa; donated £2,000 towards school building. Address: 1 Kort Street, Johannesburg. VANDAYAR, Shum- mugam, general dlr; b. Port Elizabeth, May 6, 1908, e. s. of late P. Vandayar; educ. Dower School, P.E.; m. Streerengam, d. of P. Ragoonaden of Mauritius, 2 s., 2 d. Public activities: Vice-pres. Siva Sub- ramoniar Allayam; was pres. Saraswathi Educ. Instit.; now trustee; pres. Hindu Primary Sch. Comm.; manager Hindu Primary Sch. was treas. S.A.1.C.U. 1949; treas. E.P. Indian Sports Ground assoc.; vice-pres. E.P. Cricket Federation; pres. E.P. Ind. Football Assoc. 1955- 56-57; hon. life. vice-pres. E.P.I.F.A.; mem. P.E. Ind. Scout Assoc.; hon. life vice-pres. E.P. Indian Cricket Union. Address: Bus., 5 Fairie St., P.E., ret 26600; Res., 32 Walmer Rd., P.E., Phone 4723.

---

## Page 11

220 THE SOUTH AFRICAN VANDAYAR, Poo- noosamy R., general dealer; b. P.E., Mar. 16, 1910, s. of late P. Vandayar; educ. Dower School; m. Archiecannoo, d. of Alhiemoolum, 2 c. Est. bus. at 126a, 130 Russell Rd., trading under the name of Imperial Fruiterers, Grocers and Out- fitters. Public activi- ties: Trustee Siva Subramoniar Allayam; pres. Saraswathi Educ. Instit.; hon. life vice- pres. E.P, Ind. C.U.; has interested himself with the welfare of Orient C.C. and Shamrocks Ind. F.C. for the past 25 years; as pres. of the S.E. Instit., brought about the incorporation of the Instit. into the Siva Subra- monair Allayam. Address: Res., 126a Russell Rd., P.E., Phone 24113. VAN DER PLANK, Mercia, nurse; b. Dannhauser Dec. 27, 1936, e. d. of John van der Plank; educ. St. Oswalds High School, Newcastle, J.C. 1953. Took up nursing at St. Aidan’s Indian Hospital. Public activities: Keenly interested in the affairs of the Indian comm. Rec.: Cycling, pen pals. Address: St. Aidan’s Hospital; Res., P.O. Dannhauser. VANMARE, Gangaram, Commissioner of Oaths, fresh produce and general dealer; b. Kolvad, dist. Surat, India, 1890, e. s. of late Vanmare Rama; m., 1 s., 1 d.; educ. Kolvad. Came to S.A. with father in 1902, settled in Greytown, est. bus. with uncle as partner; produce dealer trading as G. G. Vanmare. Public activities: Former sec. Greytown District Indian Assoc. (now Natal Indian Congress, Grey- town Branch); sec. Greytown Indian School Board; was treas. (now trustee) Hindu Sanathan Dharma Sabha; was sec. then pres. and now patron of the Greytown Indian Tennis Club; vice-pres., comm. mem. and delegate of Greytown Indian Football Assoc. Address: P.O. Box 20, Pine St., Greytown, Phone 34. VANMARE, Madho, storekeeper; b. Greytown, July 10, 1926; m. Kemla, 2nd d. of Mr. Bhoola Parso- tham of Klerksdorp, Tvi., 1 s., 1 dj educ. Grey- town and Sastri College. Joined father as partner in bus.; also in the S.A.R. & H. Catering Department at Greytown. Public activities: Was sec. of Greytown Hindu Maha Sabha and a keen soccerite. Rec.: motoring. Address: Res., 8 Bell St., P.O. Box 179, Greytown, Natal. VANMARI, Vallabh, general merchant; b. Surat, India, July 21, 1921, 0. s. of late Vallabh Bhoola; educ. Govt. Indian School, Jhb.; m. Lakshmiben, d. of Kasanjee of Surat, India, 2 s., 1 d. Est. bus. 1946 as wholesale merchant under style of Patlad & Co. Takes active part in social and educational affairs of the Indian community; participates in all forms of sport. Address: Bus. and Res., 62 Bree St., Fordsburg, Jhb., Phone 339068. INDIAN WHO’S WHO VARACHIA, Goolam Hoosen, commercial traveller; s. of S. E. Varachia; b. Kathor, India; bus.: Travelling in course of business for past 34 years. Public activi- ties: Pres. of Natal Indian Commercial Travellers’ Association. Address: 165 Retief St., Pmburg, Phone 21398. Durban address: “Musafir Manzil’, 20 North St., Phone 22116, P.O. Box 1389, Tel. Add.: “Fametraver”, Durban. VARACHIA, Mohamed Rashid, merchant; b. Jhb., 1915, s. of Ahmed S. Varachia, trading as wholesale merchant at 37 Commissioner St. Public activities: Trustee of the Nana Memorial Trust; sec. of the Muslim Social Welfare Soc.; sec. of the S.A. Cricket Board of Control; pres. of the S.A. Indian Cricket Union; sec. of the Wits Indian Cricket Union; vice- pres. Inter-Race Cricket Board; trustee of the Jhb. Indian Sports Ground Assoc.; rep. Tvl. in the first S.A. Indian Cricket Tournament; has held numerous high official positions in the Tvl. for number of years; toured India and Pakistan, extensively by car; chair. of the Kohinoor Cricket Club; sec. Lachpur Muslim Assoc. Address: 37 Commissioner St., P.O. Box 8267, Jhb., Phone 331725. VASSAN, Narsi; b. Gendeva, dist. of Surat, Bombay, India, Nov, 15, 1911; y. s. of Narsi Vallabh Gendeva; settled in Cape Town in 1926; est. bus. in 1930, trading under name Kohinoor Stores, specialising in footwear, now trading as Narsi Gaiety Stores (Pty.), Ltd.; was pres. of Katryia Mithra Mundal Soc. and S.A. Mochee Mahasaba; takes a keen interest in affairs of Indian community. Res.: 389 Lower Main Rd., Salt River, Phone 58278, Cape Town. VASSENJEE, Billimoria Kalidas, merchant; b. Billimoria, Surat, June 15, 1912, e. s. of Vassanjee Bhukabhai Billimoria; m. Kasiben, d. of Juga Morar of Surat. Came to S.A. with father in 1922: educ. at Billimoria and C.T. Settled in Cape Town and worked in father’s bus.; in 1931 est. bus., trading under name Vassen Fruiterer. Was chair. of Khstria Moochi Mundal Soc.; now pres. S.A. Moochi Mahasaba. Address: 190 Victoria Rd., Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 54135. VAWDA, Cassim Ismail] Hajee, mechant; b. Lady- smith, Sept. 1905; c. of Ismail Wawda; educ. Ladysmith Govt, Indian School; 2 s., 3 d. Bus.: Took over father’s business, trading as Ismail Moosajee, in 1925; now man. dir. of Ismail Moosajee & Sons. Public activities: Visited Arabia, Kenya and Aden on way to Haj in 1955; keenly interested in all sporting activities; takes a keen interest in social welfare of the Indian community. Rec.: Motoring and reading. Add.: Bus. 52-54 Albert St., Phone 4, P.O. Box 44: Res., 17 Newcastle Rd., Phone 310, Ladysmith. VAWDA, Ismail Mohamed, bookkeeper; b. 1917. Was employed by I. Vawda Bros, for 5 years, Kajee Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. 6 years, past years employed by Lockhat Bros. & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Trustee Madressa Anjuman Islam; acting grantee for Anjuman Islam Govt.-aided Indian School, Crescent Religious Govt.-aided School, Ahmedia Govt.-aided Indian School, South Coast Madressa Govt.-aided School; treas. Muslim Employers’ Council. Address: 5 Saville St., Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO VAWDA, Dr. M. E., medical practitioner; b. Kathor, India, 1914, s. of late E. S. Vawda; educ. St. Oswalds High School, proceeded to Bombay to further his studies at the Bharda High School; qualified in Edinburgh at the School of Medicine of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons; now practising in Newcastle. Rec.: Reading. Add- ress: Res., 38 Murchison St., P.O. Box 138, New- castle, Phones: Surgery, 59; Res., 188. VELLOO, Naddais, general dealer; b. 1924, East London, y. s. of P. Velloo; educ. St. Savior’s Sch.; m. Savitri, d. of S. S. Pillay of Durban, 1 s., 4 d. Bus.: Est. bus 1939, trading as N. Velloo, Fresh Produce Dealer; later est. general dealers bus. at 24 Wolseley St., trading under style of Velloo Bros. Hon. life vice-pres. Merchants F.C.; mem. E.L. Hindu Tamil Protection Soc.; mem. E.L. Indian Assoc. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 24 Wolseley St., E.L., Phone 4628. VELLOO, Naran~ samy, general dealer; b. 1913, East London e. s. of late P. Velloo, of East London; educ. St. John’s Sch.; m. Govindamah, d. of P. D. Govender; 2 s., 3 d.; commenced trad. 1928, also established business at 24 Wol- seley Street, trading as Velloo Bros. Opened branch at 11 St. Paul’s Rd. trading as Velloo’s Cash Store, 1954. Public activi- ties: Mem. Hindu Religious Protection Soc.; comm. mem. Hindu Temple; helped to raise funds for Temple building. Address: Bus., 24 Wolseley St., East London, Phone 4628; Res.: 12 Walker St., East London. VINDEN, Niella, housewife; b. in Dur- ban, May 1937, e. d. of R. Gilbert of Escombe, Natal; educ. at St. Theresis School, Mayville, Dartnell Cres. Girls School; took a course in shorthand typing at St. Philomenas Convent; was em- ployed by Lochat Bros.; m. Dr. S. D. Vinden in 1956, 1 d. Won second place in photogenic contest in 1954, Rec.: Needle- work and swimming. Address: Middleburg, C.P. N N — VINDEN, Stanley David, doctor (M.B. B.Ch.); b. Stanger, Natal, Feb. 18, 1928, e. s. of A. Vinden; educ. at Cato Manor Indian School, Burn- side and Greyville Boys School and Sastri College; ob- tained a first class F . pass in P.S.C., Junior . Fi Certificate and Mat- riculation examina- tions; studied medi- . cine at the Witwaters- ? ee rand University from on fe 1946 to 1951; was selected “Scholar” of the University” in 1946; an honour for outstanding ability; served internship at the McCord Zulu Hospital in 1952; resident Medical Officer at St. Aidan’s Hospital from 1953 to 1955; started private practice in 1955; m. Neilla, d. of R. Gilbert of Escombe in April 1956. Public activities: Mem. of St. Aidan’s Mission Church; played soccer and took part in athletics whilst at Sastri College; while at University played soccer for Vredons F.C.; also sec. of the Indian Students’ Bursary Comm. Address: Middleburg, C.P. VENKETRAYALU, A. (Vengan), general dealer; b. at Clairwood, Durban, s. of M. C. Apadu; educ. at St. Michael Govt.-aided Indian School. Est. a general dealers bus. in 1948; later took up Insurance Agency. Public activities: Sec. S.C.D.IL.F.A. 1944-50; sec. N.IL.F.A. 1949; vice-pres. S.C.D.IL.F.A. 1951-56; vice-pres. S.C.D.1.C.U. 1950-57; pres. S.C.D.LLF.A. 1957; councillor S.A.I.F.A. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 187 Sirdar Road, Clairwood, Durban. VITHAL, Ramee, bookkeeper, insurance agent, sec. of com- panies; b. Navsari, In- dia, August 15, 1926; s. of Vithal Naran; educ. Doornfontein Ind. & Col. Sch. & Jhb. Ind. H.S.;) m. Kasi, d. of Harkisan Laxman; 2 b. Ex-sec. Jhb. Rajput Mandal; mem. Hindu C.C.; auditor, W.1.C. Union. Add.: P.O. Box 127, Fordsburg, Jhb.

---

