# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt6
**Total Pages:** 12

---

## Page 1

140 THE SOUTH AFRICAN MOTALA, Saleh Moosa,___ bookkeeper; b. Durban, July 19, 1904; e. s. of late Moosa Saleh Motala; formerly of Dundee; m. d. of late C. A. Meer, formerly of Waschbank; 7 s., 1 d.; educ. Dundee and Durban. Bookkeeper, with business connec- tions in Northern Dis- tricts. Public activities: First sec. N.C. (Dun- dee and Dist. Branch), sec. Moslem Madressa for the past 20 years and chairman for 3 years; chairman of Ind, Ratepayers’ Assn., Dundee; sec. Mosque Madressa-E-Islamia Trust, Dundee, since 1930. Address: 32 Ann St., Dundee, Phone 292. MOTTIAR, Ahmed Dada, gen. merchant; b. Ranavav, India; e. s. of Dada Kahn Ma- homed of Ranavav; educ. Ranavav & pte. studies; m. Mariam, d. of Ayob Kurtha of Ranavav; 7 s., 5 d. After a period of pte. employment, estd. a commission agency in 1919; opened a whole- sale bus. in 1926, trading as Mottiar’s Commercial Agency; estd.a clothing factory in Pietersburg in 1935; transferred to Jhb. in 1936; managing director of Capital Clothing Company. Visited Europe in 1931. Public activities: Was a comm. mem. T.I-C. Address: Bus., 4 Adam’s Arc., Johannesburg, Phone 331130; Res., corner Park Rd., 40 Market St., Johannesburg, Phone 237703. MUDELIAR, Natsen Shumoogam, b. Ladysmith, 1908; s. of C. N. Mudeliar; educ, Ladysmith Govt. Ind. Sch., now known as Windsor High Sch.; m. d. of S. D. Moodley; 4 s., 2 d. Public activities: Played for Klip River District Ind. F.A.; played against All- India in 1934; foundation mem. of Siegetown Tennis Club; hon. sec. Young Hindu Service Society; hon. sec. Hindu Thirkootam and Shree Ganser Temple; helped to raise funds for bursaries for local scholars; hon. sec. Ladysmith Deepavali Celebration Comm. and comm mem. since its inauguration; comm. mem. Ind. Child Welfare Soc.; assisted with the collection of funds for numerous Benevolent Societies; was hon. assist. sec. Northern District Ind. Cricket Union; was hon. sec. Klip River District Ind. F.A. Address: Res., 292a Murchison St., Phone 875, Ladysmith. INDIAN WHO’S WHO MUKADAM, Mohamed Hoosain, merchant; b. Tudil, Kolaba, India, 1915; y. s. of late Hajee Mohamed Ebrahim Mukadam; educ. India and Cape Town; m. Rabia, d. of F. Abdurahman, of Tudil, India; 1 s., 3 d.; estd. own bus. in 1923, trading as M. Hoosain. Public activities: Mem. Cape Ind. Con- gress, mem. Habibyia Educ. Inst., mem. Cape Ind. Traders’ Assn., mem. Muslim League. Address: Klip- fontein Rd., Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 61026. MULLA, Abdul Hamid, B.A., LL.B.; b. Greytown, Natal; s. of Mr. Ismail Mulla of Greytown; m. to Fatima Vawda, d. of Mr. I. D. Vawda of Dannhauser, Natal; 3 s.; educ, at Greytown and Sastri College, Durban; first Indian to qualify for the B.A., LL.B degrees in S.A. and the first non- European to attend the Witwatersrand Univer- sity; was head prefect at Sastri College; qualified to practise as an advocate, now practises as an attorney and notary public of the Natal Prov. Div. of S.A.; whilst at the university, took part in all activities organised by the college; was sec. of the Law Students’ Soc. for three consecutive years; comm. mem. Liberal Party, Natal Coastal Region; comm. mem. of the Uni- versity Debating Soc.; sec. of the International Rela- tions Study Circle; comm. mem. of the Bantu Study Soc.; was Ist non-European to repst. the university at the National Union of S.A. Students’ Conference held at Cape Town in 1938; executive mem. N.LO.; was sec, of the Orient Club for four years; while at Sch. took an active part in sport. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 118 Grey St., Durban, Phone 28557; Res., 204 Cowey Rd., Durban, Phone 39995. MULLAH, Goolam Mahomed, tailor and merchant; b. Pinetown, Sept. 5, 1932; 6th s. of Suleman Cassim of Durban; educ. Pinetown G.A.J. Sch.; served as an apprentice at Parshothams of Grey St.; later opened bus. at 104 Lakhani Chmbrs and at Valbro Chmbrs., trading as Continental Clothing Mnfrs. Public act.: Takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian com- munity. Rec.: Angling. Address: Bus., 42 Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St.; Res., 72 Sheringam Rd., Overport, Phone 885341. MULLAJEE, Ismail, merchant; b. Cape Town, 1928; s. of A. Mullajee; educ. Trafalgar High Sch., Cape Town. After a period of private employment estd. own bus. in 1950 at 11th Ave.{ Windermere, later appointed director _G.B. Bazaar \(Pty.) Ltd.; mem. Habibiya Moslem Educational Inst.; executive mem. Hidayatul-Islam Mosque, Kensington; mem. of Orient Sport Club; takes keen interest in religious and Islamic matters. Rec.: Cricket, football, table tennis. Address: Bus., 11th Ave., 3rd St., Windermere, Cape Town, Phone 54870; Res., 4th Ave., 14th St., Ken- sington, Cape Town, Phone 55814. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 141 MUNSAMY, Chinnakanu Ramsami, farmer and com- pany director; b. Feb., 1898, Verulam, Natal; s. of Ramsami; educ. Wesleyan Indian School, Umhloti; m. Muniamah, d. of Ramsamy, of Ploughland, Veru- Jam; after her death married Lutchmamah, d. of Lutchmayiah Naidoo, Isnembe; 4 s., 7 d. Business: Sugar cane farming in 1924; ex-clerk of Waterson Bros. Public activities: Founder of Spitkop Govt- Aided Indian School; chairman Spitkop School Board; director of Pakco (Pty.), Ltd., Verulam. Recre- ation: Gardening. Address: Bus., Phone 118. Box 65, Verulam; Res., High Street, Tongaat, Natal. MUNSAMY, Chin- nappen, schoolmaster; educ. Stella Hill Govt- aid. Ind. Sch.; at pre- sent at Moongalam Govt. Aid. Ind. Sch. Commenced _ teaching at Stella Hill Govt.- aided Ind. Sch., 1929; transferred to Malvern Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. 1933; transferred to Stella Hill Govt.-aided Ind. Schl. 1937; trans- ferred to Hindu Tamil Inst. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. 1943; chairman Cato Manor Care Committee (FOS A) 1945-47; mem. Durban Ind, Child Welfare Soc.; mem. Durban Ind. Benevolent Soc., one of its foundation members and its first sec., Cato Ind. Educ. Soc., which owns River View Govt-aided Ind. Sch.; Assistant Div. Commissioner, Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ Assn.; played soccer for Stella Hill Ind. Sch. F.C. 1920: joined Mayville District Indian F.C. as a delegate for Stella Hill F.C. 1929; record clerk for Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1931; vice-presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1932-47; manager Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. team that toured Transvaal in 1938; delegate to Natal Ind. F.A., repst. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1940- 55, manager Central team All-India Cup tournament, presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1941; chairman May- ville Dist. Ind. F.A., Protest, Misconduct and Enquiry Board, 1945-1947; elected hon. life vice-prestd. May- ville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1948; delegate S.A. Ind. F.A., reprst. Natal Ind. F.A. 1945-54; mem. Overseas Comm. S.A.I.F.A. 1947-1954; presdt. Durban and Dist. Ind. Sch. F.A. 1951-52; delegate to S.A. Soccer Federation, repst. S.LF.A., 1951-54; mem. Appeal Board N.LF.A. 1946-49; presdt. N.I-F.A. 1952-53; trust. Mayville Dist. Ind. Sports Ground Assn., hon. life vice-presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. C.U., hon. life vice-presdt, Inter-Dist. Ind. C.U.; presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. Sports Ground Assn; presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. Cricket Union; Presdt. Durban and Dist. Ind. Sch. Athletic Union; presdt. Clairwood and Dist. Sch. Sports Council. Address: 66 Pastoral Rd., Overport, Durban. MUNSHI, Ahmed Ahmood, general agent and secre- tary of companies; b. Surat, India, Aug. 31, 1918; €. s. of late Mahmood Ameermia Munshi; educ. Sir J. J. High School, Surat, India; m. Ayesha Bibi, €2 d. of Mohamed Moorad of Kathor, India; 2 s., 6 d. After leaving school joined the firm of Amod Jajbhoy (estate agents); later was in partnership, trading under style of M. E. Seedat Munshi & Co.; is now sole proprietor. Is keenly interested in general welfare of Indians. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 9 Adam’s Are., 40 Market St., P.O. Box 8886, Phone 337785, Johan- nesburg; Res., 23e 18th St., Vrededorp, Phone 355924, Johannesburg. MURUGAN, Durma- lingam (Frank), farmer & cartage contractor; b. La Mercy, Natal, August 22, 1918; educ. J.C.; m. d. of late S, Pandaram, of Veru- lam; 2d. 1s. Bus: Estd. cartage contrac- tors’ bus., trading as Frank’s Cartage Con- tractors at Chaka’s Kraal, Natal; estd. taxi bus. 1937; also » farms in the dist.: 3 patron Rama Krishna Centre of Chaka’s Kraal branch. Address: L £2 D. Murugan, P.O. Chaka’s Kraal, Natal, Phone 90 Umhlali. MUTHAYAN, Visvanathan, banana merchant; b. 1930, P.E.; s. of late R. Muthayan; educ. Hindu Sch., P.E.; was assoc. with late father in bus., later took over sole control, trading as E.P. Banana Wholesalers, one of the largest importers of bananas from Natal. Address: 15 South Beach terr., South End, Port Elizabeth, Phone 23466. MUTHUKISINA, Purushotmanmuth, B.A., LEB., Wits.; Diploma in Ind. Philosophy, Benares; played a prominent part in Student activities at Wits. Add.: Box 91, Stanger, Natal. MUTHUKISTNA, Pam, Attorney; educ. N.U.C.; only Indian woman practising law in S.A. Add.: P.O. Box 91, Stanger. NAICKER, Moorgan Shunmugam; secretary of com- panies and public bookkeeper; b. July 4, 1918, Sea View, Natal; y. s. of Moorgan Naicker; educ. Sea View Ind. School; m. Visalatchie, d. of late Muthoo Padayachee, Newcastle; 1 s., 5 d. Business: Sec. of companies and public bookkeeper. He has secured the following certificates: Fellow of the Association of Commercial Science, Fellow of the Inst. of Commerce, Diploma, School of Accountancy. Public activities: Mem. Durban International Club; hon. auditor Vishnu Temple, Sea View; South Indian Musical Assoc.; patron Thirrukural Soc. of Durban. Recrea- tion: Gardening, radio and music. Address: Bus., Phone 27080, 23 Valbro Chambers, Victoria Street, Durban; Res., Phone 819282, 118 Railway Road, Sea View, Durban.

---

## Page 2

142 THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAGDEE, Haijee Yusuf, rep. of manu- facturing firms; b. Warmbaths, Tvl.; e. s. of Hajee M. Nag- dee; educ. Galiara High School, Kathor, India; m. Ayesha, d. of M. Nagdee; was assoc. with father’s bus. in 1927, later est. own bus. Public activities: Sec. of Kachholi Assoc.; mem. of National Union of Commercial Travellers; visited U.K., the Continent, the Far East and East Africa. India and Pakistan. Rec.: Reading. Address: 9 Luttig St., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 337305. NAICKER, Gunga- thura Mohambrey, M.B., Ch.B. (Edin.), L.M. (Dublin); b. Durban, Sept. 30, 1910; m., 1 d.; educ. Marine College and University of Edin- burgh; joined 1929 medical section; was mem. of Students’ Representative Coun- cil (Edin.); mem. of the Edinburgh Indian Assoc.’s Comm. of Management 1932; editor of the Edin- burgh Indian Assoc. Handbook — 1932-33, 1933-34, mem. All-India Congress (Edinburgh Branch). Sport: Mem. of the Ping-Pong Indian University team 1931; mem. of team playing against Austrian visiting tennis team 1939; pres. N.I.C. Address: 189 Percy Osborne Rd., Durban. NAICKER, Pupchey- appen, farmer and Comm. of Oaths; 6th s. of Poonsamy Naicker of Umzinto; b. Umzinto 1898; educ. Umzinto Ind. School and St. Paul’s High School, Vepery, Madras; joined the 88th Carnatic Regi- ment after leaving school, returned to S.A. in 1919, and was admitted as part. with the Umzinto Grain and Produce Co.; took up cane & general farming at INDIAN WHO’S WHO Glynn Albion in 1936; manufacturer of Naicker’s celebrated snuff. Public activities: Pres. Esperenza and Sezela Indian Mill Group; vice-pres. Natal Indian Canegrowers’ Assoc.; grantee Glynn Albion and Braemar Govt.-aided Indian Sch.; trustee Glynn Albion and Wincanton Temples; trustee Ranjit Recr. Grounds; mem. Umzinto Child Welfare and F.O.S.A. and a director of N.IJ. Tobacco Growers’ Co-op. Co. Ltd.; visited India in 1917 for two years. Address “Glynn Albion,” Private Bag, P.O. Braemar, Umzinto, Phone 1902. NAICKER, Narainsamy Thumbi, B.A.; educ. Sastri College, Wits. and N.U.C. Public Act.: Sec. N.I.C.; played a prominent part in Student Activities; one of twenty Indians facing the Treason Trial. Add.: 55-58 Fourth Floor, Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St., Durban. NAICKER, Tharuma Moonsamy, produce merchant; b. Johannesburg, Oct. 13, 1907, s. of Tharuma Naicker; educ. Benoni Govt. Indian School; m. Parvathiama, 2 s., 2 d. Public activities: Vice-pres. Hindu Maha Sabha; pres. Tamil School Board, Benoni; delegate Transvaal Tamil Benefit Society; patron Sithambaram orchestra. Rec.: Has supported every worthy cause devoted to the uplift of all sections of the Indian comunity of Benoni. Address: No. 4 17th St., Benoni, Transvaal. NAICKER, Thun- gavelu Murugesa; b. Umgeni, Natal, Sept. 1889; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, passing Natal Collec- tive Exam., Haggar’s Comml. Academy, Durban; was _head- master of the Um- bogintwini Govt.- aided Indian School, now Isipingo (1909- 1912); 1923 apptd. to Umgeni Govt. Jn- dian School. Public activities: Pres. and hon. life pres. Young Men’s Vedic Society; life-pres. Durban Indian Surf Life. Saving Club; pres. Natal Indian Farmers’ Assoc.; life vice-pres. Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, Durban and District Indian Football Assoc., Durban Indian Referees’ Assoc.; hon. joint sec. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; life trustee Durban Indian Sports Ground Assoc.; life trustee and hon. sec. Durban District Indian Football Assoc. Trust; chair. Tanjore Indian School Board, Umgeni; pres. Umbilo Hindu Temple, Riverside Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc. Durban North, Durban Higher Grade Indian School Old Boys’ Assoc.; patron Hindu Youth Club; vice-patron Natal Ind. Boy Scouts’ and Girl Guides’ Assoc; Indian Social Service Comm., India Branch S.A. Youth Movement, Umgeni Road Hindu Temple Comm.; held numerous other impor- tant official positions; was a keen sportsman, playing football and cricket, was also bantamweight boxer. Address: Res., 39 Riverside Rd., Umgeni, Durban North, Phone 832957. THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, Aiyavaroo Jaganayakulu, general agent; b. Durban, 1905; e. s. of A. Naidoo, of Stella Hill, Durban; educ. Stella Hill Govt.-Aided Indian Sch., Carlisle St. Indian School; m. Nagamma, 4 s., 3 d. Bus.: Was a fruit exp. and fresh prod. dealer, now repres. an insurance company, Public activities: Was sec. and pres of Andhra Maha Sabha of S.A., now life vice-pres.; foundation mem. and life vice-pres. of Stella Hill branch of the Andhra Sabha, also of Stella Hill Ratepayers’ and Residents’ Assn.; comm. mem. Andhra Benefit Soc.; pres. Stella Hill Indian School Assn.; vice-pres. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; keenly interested in Telugu literature and Hindu religious matters. Address: Bus., Andhra House, 43 Leopold St., Box 2255, Durban; Res., 295 Grosvenor Rd., May- ville, Phone 6-2484. NAIDOO, Anand, B.D.S., L.D.S. (Duneln) dental surgeon; b. March 5, 1932, Dbn.; e. s. of Narainsamy Naidoo, of Durban; educ. Depot Road In- dian Sch., Sastri Col- lege, and Fort Hare College, C.P.; m. Vel- liamah, e. d. of late V.L. Pather, of Dbn.:; 1 d. Proceeded to King’s College, New- castle - upon - Tyne, where he graduated, taking the L.D.S. in 1949 & B.D.S. (Hons.) ‘ in 1950. Was mem. Council, Dental Students’ Soc., King’s College; prac- tised in Durham City and London for a short period; chair. Indian Assoc., Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Sporting activities; Was victor ludorum, Sastri College, 1941; Soccer and cricket at King’s College; County Athletic Champ. 1947 (Northumberland and Durham). Toured extensively Ireland and the Continent. Recreation: Interested in dramatics. Set up practice as dental surgeon in 1951 at 88-90 Victoria Street, Durban. Address: Bus., 88-90 Victoria Street, Phone 62439; Res., 135 Seventh Avenue, Durban. NAIDOO, Veilimah, b. May 15, 1926, Jhb.: e. d. of Mrs. and late V. L. Pather; m. Dr. Anand Naidoo, dental surgeon, Dbn.; educ. Govt. Indian School, Fordsburg, and High School, Vrededorp, Jhb. Settled in Dbn. 1943. Visited England, Scotland, Ireland, the Continent, the Middle East and East Africa. Interested in all pro- gressive community movements. Recrea- tion: Classical music. Address: Res., 135 Seventh Ave., Dbn. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 143 NAIDOO, Anthony Charles Selvan, teacher; b. 1927, Mafeking; m. Francis Naidoo; educ. St. Francis Xavier Coloured School, Mafeking and The Euro-Afn. Teachers Training College, Johannesburg; under- graduate of the University of S.A. now teaching at the Rustenburg Indian High School; intro- duced the Ist College magazine “Normag”, Public activities: Takes an active interest in the affairs of the com- munity; did secretarial work for the Celebration of the Bharathiar Committee. Rec.: Hiking. Address: P.O. Box 58, Rustenburg, Transvaal. NAIDOO, Appana Ramachundra, broker and agent; b. Feb. 1, 1923, Pmb., Natal: @, s. of Appana Naidoo: educ, Wesleyan Ind. School, Pmb., Higher Grade School, Dbn., and Port Shepstone Ind. School; m. Sor- num, 2nd d. of late V. Puckree Thaver, Dbn.; 1 d. Business: Manufacturers’ repr., broker and agent; owned a business in the Indian Market for five years; in 1950 joined Pakco (Pty.), Ltd. as sales repr, where in 1952 he became a director; in 1955 opened under the title A.R. Agencies, manuf, repr., broker and agent, Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria Street, Durban; owner of a pet shop in the Indian Market. Public activities: Council mem. N. Tamil Vedic Soc.; interested in sports, physical culture and social activities. Recreation: Fishing. Club: Pirates Angling Club. Adress: Bus., Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria St., Phone 63336, Durban; Res., 91 Argyle Road, Phone 36686, Durban. NAIDOO, Applesamy Ramannah, mer it; Stella Hill, Durban, 1926; educ. matric; a Divan Cosmetic Store, June, 1957 and Naidoo’s Drapery and Sari Centre, October, 1957. Public activities: Chair Fenniscowles Area Care Committee; Fosa chair.- Fenniscowles Angling Club and Olympic Social Club; mem. Stella Hill Indian School Assoc. and Stella Hill Old Boys’ Club; Embassy Literary and Debating Soc. Rec.: Cricket, table tennis. Address: : hes Arcade, Durban; also 14la Grey St. urban. j

---

## Page 3

144 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO NAIDOO, Applesamy Papiah, general dealer; b. Illovo, Natal, April PZ, 1915, 3rd os. of Papiah Naidoo; m. Lutchmiammah. e. d. of Mr. T. J. Naidoo of Tinley Manor, Natal, 4 s, 4 4d; educ. Malvern Indian School and _ private study; after leaving school, joined his brother in business, trading as Highway Farmers’ Trading Co. at 102a Prince Edward St., Durban, Natal; was a keen soccerite; interested in public and charitable bodies; visited India in 1938. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 102a Prince Edward St., Durban, Phone 26285; Box 7, Westville, Natal. NAIDOO, Barasarthi Thambi, salesman; b. Dec. 1903, Johannesburg, 3rd s. of late Thambi Naidoo; educ. Indian Govt. School, Johannesburg; m. Nellie, d. of Vansitters, 4 s., 4 d.; toured India with brothers in the year 1914; resided at late Ghandi’s Ashram in Amedabad; returned to the Union in the year 1917; in the year 1951, joined the firm of Messrs. Bhoola & Co. as salesman. Public activities: Vice- pres. of the Transvaal Indian Congress; was a mem. of the Tamil Benevolent Soc, Johannesburg; mem. of the S.A. Peace Council; chair. of the New Era Cricket Club; former mem. of Stella F.C.; vice- pres. of New Burg U.F.C.; travelled in Africa extensively; mem. Working Comm. and Executive Tvl. Indian Congress. Rec.: Sport. Address: 40a May Rd., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 342215, NAIDOO, Chengayiah K.; bookkeeper, land and estate agent; b. Dec. 16, 1903; at Pie- termaritzburg; s. of Chengayiah Naidoo; educ. in Pietermaritz- burg; m., 8 ch. Busi- ness: Bookkeeper, 1930 to 1931; was in Nak- uru, Kenya Colony; 1932-42 cafe & fresh prod. dealer, Tongaat, Natal. Public activi- ties: Hon. treas. T.H. S.B.A. Assn, Tongaat (1934-43); hon. treas. Stanger Siva Temple (1947-49); hon, treas. Stanger Sentamil Inst. (1947-52). Recreation: Garden- ing and reading. Adress: Bus., Box 25, 117 Rood St., Stanger; Res., High St. Tongaat, Natal. NAIDOO, Dr. G. Chilkah, B.Sc. (S.A.), M.B., Ch.B. (Rand); m. Dr. S. Reddy; takes a keen interest im social welfare activities of the Indian community. Address: Room 1, 144 Victoria St., Durban. NAIDOO, Chinna, laundry prop.; b. Durban, May 5, 1911, e. s. of Appalsamy Naidoo of Durban; m. Beatrice, o. d. of Allasamy Naidoo of Durban, 6 s, 2 dz educ. Umgeni Govt. School; started laundry bus. at Umkomaas in 1931; has installed modern machinery. Public activities: Treas. Craggi- burn Govt.-aided Indian School; takes a_ keen interest in education. Rec.: Angling, golf. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 88, Umkomaas, Phone 4; res., 78 McLean St., Umkomaas, Phone Ext. ae j NAIDOO, Coopo- samy Perumal, school principal; b. New- castle, Natal, Oct. 52 1898, s. of Cooposamy Naidoo; educ. Fairbreeze Govt.-aided Indian School, m. d. of Subba Naidoo, 2 s., 5 d. Assistant teacher in 1913, and served at the Fairbreeze and Tongaat Schools; principal Isnembe Govt.-aided Indian School in 1928, and Fairbreeze Govt. Ind. School in 1951; took the N.I. Junior Certificate 1921, N.I. Senior Certifi- cate 1923, N.T. Fourth Cl Certificate 1933. Public activities: Trustee Isnembe Ind. Sch. Board, chair. Tongaat I. Mill Group; Chair. T.I. School Trust Board; mem. Maidstone Mill non-European Board; mem. N.LT. Soc.; interested in cane farming; ex- mem. N.C.I.F. Assoc. Rec.: Angling. Address: Mait- land Park, P.O. Tongaat, Natal. — NAIDOO, Dhanpaul; general dealer & cart- age contractor; b. Oct. 1913, Pinetown, Natal; e. s. of R. L. Naidoo, of Durban; educ. Ind. School, Pinetown, St. Aidan’s and Higher «Grade Schools, Dur- Ban; m. e. d. of K. A. - Moodley, Kearsney, Natal; 2 s., 2 d. Busi- ness: Cartage contrac- tor, est: 1940; general dealer’s, est. 1945; spe- cialises in radio and elec. repairs. Public I activities: Mem. N.LC.; = ex-sec. Greyville br. N.1LC.; ex-patron and pres. Stella F.C. (1955); ex-sec. THE SOUTH AFRICAN Central C.C.; and pres. Silverton F.C.; com. mem. Rents Protection Com.; sec. Hindu Youth Club; ex- pres. Centenary Tennis Club. Recreation: Tennis and table tennis. Address: Bus., Phone 26287, 13 May St.; Res., Phone 64065, 23 North St., Durban. NAIDOO, D.; b. Durban 1926; educ. Greyville Govt.-aided Indian School; m., 3 c. Established a butchery. Public activities; Connected with social welfare organisations in Durban. Address: 42 Botanic Ave., Durban. NAIDOO, D. Rajoo; fruit exporter; b. Coedmore, Natal, June 16, 1925; s. of late K. D. Naidoo; educ. pri- mary and commercial education; m. Sora- jini, d. of Freddy Nai- doo, Mayville; 1 d. Business: Trading as City Fruit Supply, fr. and prod. dealers, ex- porters of fresh fruit and vegetables in sea- son; took over father’s business in 1947. Pub- lic activities: Ex-pat- ron S.C.I. Football Assn.; mem. Andra Maha Sabha of S.A. Recreation: Gardening. Add.: Bus., 146 Prince Edward St.; Res., 98 First Avenue, Durban. NAIDOO, Elleppah Verdayya, vice-prin- cipal; b. Durban 1908, s. of Y. Nai- doo of Ameer, India; educ., holds Natal Teachers’ Diploma. Public activities: One of the founders Boy Scout Movement in Natal; served as Scouter; sec. Asst. Divisional & Deputy Divisional Commis- sioner; later promoted to Divisional Com- missioner for Natal; co-founder of Clair- wood branch M. L. Sultan College; held position of lecturer 1950; com- menced teaching 1922, served Clairwood School for 28 years; was associated with late H. S. Done in his work for the advancement of education in Clairwood; was chair. and vice-chair. of Clairwood branch of N.LT.S.; was keen soccer and tennis player in Reece days. Address: 34 Lavender Rd., Clairwood, urban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 145 NAIDOO, Frank Percy, first grade printer; b. Lady- smith 1905, s. of N. P. Naidoo; m. A. E. Moollen, d. of L. S. Moolleen, 4 s., I d.3 educ. Ladysmith Govt.-aided School. Public activities: played soccer for Schools F.C. 1919; rep. Natal and Klip River at Port Elizabeth in 1925; pres. K.R.D.LF.A.; pres. Child Welfare Society; capt. S.A.R.LC.C.; pres. and sec. LT.C.; won N.N. doubles championship in 1935; rep. N.D.LC.U.; com. mem. H.Y.M.A.; mem. N.LLC.; rep. Newcastle at Durban during conference; com. mem. of local N.I.C. Rec.: Gardening. Address: Ladysmith, Natal. NAIDOO, George, merchant and _ estate agent; b. Paterson, Cape Province, Oct. 5, 1901; educ. East London. Watchmaker and jeweller; also house, land and general estate agent. Public activities: Mem. Coloured/ European Joint Ccl. (P.E. Branch); Cape Indian Congress (P.E. Branch); donor of the Ss. M. Naidoo Memorial Cup to P.E. Indian Cricket - Union and _ the George Naidoo Cup to the South African Coloured Lawn Tennis Assoc. for Ladies’ Singles Champion- ship; visited England and the Continent 1925. Now residing Isle of Jersey, England. NAIDOO, Govinden, cigar manufacturer; b. Sept., 1893, India; educ. in Tamil and English; m. in 1927, 9 c. Est. bus. in 1927; now proprietor of the Royal Cigar Manu- facturing Co. 85 Dayal Rd., Clair- wood. Public activi- ties: Life mem. of the Pathmajurant Andhra Sabha; was treas. and Tamil teacher for Thiru- valuvar Dharma Pada Salley; he also ren- j ! ae dered voluntary ser- vice to this organisation; foundation mem. of the Muruga Kadival Temple, Clairwood; interested in religious work. Address: Bus., 85 Dayal Rd., Clair- wood; res., 162 Horse Shoe Road, Clairwood, Durban.

---

## Page 4

146 THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, Govindasamy Narayana; b. Kimberley, April 21, 1897; 3rd s. of late S. G. Naidoo; educ. Pescod School, On father’s retirement continued busi- ness, adding various departments — cafe, fruiterers, etc. — trading in the firm name of S. Govindasamy & Son; he is also the proprietor of the Covent Garden Stores. Public activities: Was asst. then actg. sec, later senior vice-pres. of the Kimberley Indian Political Assoc.; rep. Kimberley at the first conference of the S.A.LC. in Johannesburg, 1919; gave evidence before the Lange Commission; mem. Ratepayers’ Citizenship Assoc. In sport one of the founders of the Griqua- land West Indian Cricket Assoc. and now its life vice-pres.; vice-pres. Griqualand West I-F.A. Address: Bus., Covent Gardens; res., 51 Warren St., Kimberley, Cape Province. NAIDOO, Govindadu Subrayalu; _ business- man; b. Sea View, Natal, Sept. 15, 1908; e. s. of Govindadu Naidoo; educ. Clair- wood Govt-aided Ind. School; m. Govinda- mah, e. d. of K. C. Govender; Jacobs Rd., Clairwood; 5 s., 4 d. Business: General dea- ler and fresh produce, Favourite Store, est. 1937; taxi owner; and director Rani Theatre, Jacobs Road, Clair- wood; was curry man at the Clairmont Hotel since 1938. Public activities: Com. mem. Pathmaju- rani Andhra Sabha; ex-treas. Springbok F.C.; founder, Riverside Sporting Club; interested in physical culture, weight lifting, boxing and jiu-jitsu. Address: 58 Houghton Road. Phone 819361, Clairwood, Natal. NAIDOO, Govinda- samy Vengetasamy, Comm. of Oaths, retd. school master; b. Pmburg, May 2, 1892; m. Miss C. Naidoo of Pmburg., 1 s., 1 d.; educ. York Road Govt. Indian School, Pmburg. Joined teaching pro- fession in 1912; taught at Stanger & Pmburg. (as assistant), Tinley Manor, Est- court, Dundee, Pine- town and Umgeni (as headmaster), _retired in 1952; keen sports- man, soccer, cricket, golf, tennis, boxing; founded N. Coast Indian Football Assoc. in 1922 and Weenen County Indian Football Assoc. 1929; co-founder INDIAN WHO’S WHO Pmburg. Indian Lawn Tennis Club and Natal Indian Tennis Assoc.; capt. Pmburg. Higher Grade School C.C. in 1928; capt. Stanger Cricket and Football Clubs for a number of years; capt. Natal Ind. Teachers’ Cricket Team which toured the Union in 1930; rep. Pmburg, Northern Districts and also Durban at cricket. Public activities: Pres. Natal Indian Teachers’ Soc. 1934-35; vice-pres. Natal Indian Teachers’ Soc. for many years, now life vice-pres.; student of comparative religion and philosophy and takes keen interest in welfare of the community; treas. Indian Culture and Study Group; vice-pres. Natal Indian Eisteddfod; chair. Indian School Children’s Relief Comm.; chair. Pinetown Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; patron Pinetown Indian Lawn Tennis Club; councillor Pinetown H.Y¥.M.A. Address: 66 Main Rd., Pinetown, Natal. NAIDOO, Harry, insurance agent. Public activities: Pres. S.A.LF.A.; hon. life vice-pres. S.A.L-F.A. and also of several other sporting bodies; hon. treas. S.A. Soccer Federation; grantee Sea View Govt.-aided Indian Platoon School; patron Natal Non-European Amateur Boxing Assoc. Address: Room 1, 144 Victoria St., Durban. NAIDOO, Jami, broker and commercial agent; b. in Durban, 1926, s. of G. S. L. Naidoo; m. Laxmi- devi, d. of T. M. Reddy, Durban. After leaving school was a manufacturers’ rep.; later est. Brokers and Agency bus., trading under the style of National Distribution Bureau. Public activities: Former sec. and now vice-pres. of the S.C.D.1.F.A.; chair. of Protest, Misconduct, Enquiry and Appeal Board of S.C.D.LF.A.; foundation mem. of Stella Hill F.O.S.A. Care Comm. Rec.: Angling. Address: Bus., Sth Floor, 503 Lodson Hse., Durban; res., 50 Sir Kurma Reddi Rd., Clairwood, Durban. NAIDOO, Jay Manickum; b. Durban, 1931, e. s. of M. Naidoo of Durban; educ. at Sastri College; Under Graduate, B.Sc.; m. Ruby Stella, d. of late Mr. Harris of Durban, 1 d. Took up employment in a leading hotel in Durban and later promoted an assistant to the manager. Public activities: Founda- tion mem. of the N.Y.C.; was treas. from 1950-51; winner of the Durban Darts Championship 1956- 1957; former teacher of the Isipingo Govt. Indian School; mem. Claridges Sports Club. Rec.: Chess and astronomy. Address: 392 Bellair Rd., Durban, Phone 884069. NAIDOO, Kalimuthco Perumal produce merchant; b. Pretoria July 6, 1912; educi¢Benoni Govt. Indian School; m. Parvathy. Est. present bus. as produce dealer in 1925. Public activities; Patron Tamil School Board and Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha; mem. Thistle F.C.; founder Sithambaram Tamil Orchestra; awarded several certificates and gold medals at Tamil Eisteddfod held in 1952; winners of S. S. Pillay’s trophy, Karnatic section of Eisteddfod. Address 251 17th St., Benoni, Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 147 NAIDOO, Gooroosamy Veerasamy, retired merchant; b. Pietermaritzburg, Natal, May 30, 1898; s. of M. G. Naidoo of Tongaat, Natal; m. Mariemuthu- ammal, e. d. of late P. K. Naidoo, well known public figure and friend of the late Mahatma Gandhi; 5 s., 4 d.; educ. Higher Grade Ind. Sch., Durban, and private study. Made special study of Tamil and Telugu. Bus.: Was assoc. with father’s bus.; estd. own bus. in 1921. Pub. act.: Foundation mem. Tongaat Hindu Samarasa Bodhai Andra Sabha, 1912; held position of sec., treas. auditor and chair- man; was instrumental in securing the services of S. N. C. Vardacharyalu, a distinguished scholar from India, to provide free education in Tamil, Telugu and Hindi; mem. Natal Ind. Assoc., N.LC., S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha, Natal Tamil Verdic Soc. and numerous other institutions; patron Andhra Maha Sabha of S.A., Natal South Ind. Musical Assoc.; co- founder South Ind. Women's Assoc; patron M. K. Gandhi Sentamil Sch. and Tongaat Tennis Club; ex- trustee and chairman of Umbilo Shree Ambala- vaanar Alayam, the first Hindu temple estd. in S.A. under his trusteeship and chairmanship raised large sums of money to obtain the title deeds; pres. Ton- gaat Hindu Samarasa Bodhai Andra Sabha; vice- pres. Ind. Boys Scouts Assoc., S.A.; life mem. of Hindu Gurukulam, India; a generous donor to all deserving causes; visited India four times since 1952, accompanied by wife and daughter, Mrs. V. L. - Naidoo. Highlights of these tours were their meet- ings with Rajendra Prasadh, Pundit Nehru, Rajago- paul Achariar, Dr. P. V. Naidoo and K. Venkets- swami Naidoo, B.A., M.L.A.; toured U.S.A., U.K. and the Continent accompanied by his wife, 1954. Address: 1149 Umgeni Rd., Durban, Natal, Phone 39837, NAIDOO, Mariemuthuamma Veerasamy; b. Durban; e. d. of late P. K. Naidoo, of Johannesburg; educ. private study. Pub. act.: Chairlady and co-founder of Natal South Ind. Women’s Assoc., Durban; exec. mem. of Umbilo Shree Ambalavaanar Alayam; life mem, Hindu Gurukulam, Ind.; patron South Ind. Musical Assoc. Fluent linguist in Tamil; estd. free adult vernacular classes for ladies at M. K. Gandhi Sentamil Sch.; personally conducts these classes; assoc. with her husband in his public activities.

---

## Page 5

148 THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, _ Kistappa Narainsamy, cartage contractor; b. 1916, Pmburg, e. s. of late K. Naidoo; educ. E.P.S. School; m. Angela, d. of R. Naidoo of Pmburg., Sse a2 od.) Agen period of private employment, est. car- tage bus., trading as “Rhines Cartage” and “Rhines Building Materials”, later est. ‘Rhines Demolishers’. Sec. Tamil Protec- tive Assoc.; subse- quently elected chair. and trustee 1957; mem. Pentrich Ratepayers’ Assoc.; was chair. Azalea Week Festival; one of the founders of Magnus Rover Crew; an ardent religious and social worker. Address: 100 Topham Rd., Pentrich, Pietermaritzburg. NAIDOO, Kistensamy; b. Sarnia, Natal 1921, 2nd s. of Sunkren Naidoo; m, Neela, d. of Ramsamy of Cator Manor, 2 s., 1 d.; educ. at Pinetown Govt- aided Indian School. Joined the army in 1941 in S.A. I.M.T., training in Jhb., later transported soldiers to Egypt and East Africa. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in the affairs of the Indian com- munity. Address: Res., 444 Cato Manor Rd., May- ville, Durban. NAIDOO, Krishna- samy Sumnasse, busi- nessman; b. Durban in April, 1902; s. of K. Sunasse Naidoo; m., 6 ch.; educ. St. Aidan’s Ind. School, Durban, and Indian School, Tinley Manor. In 1926 entered the services of Tongaat Sugar Co., and con- tinued for 20 years; est. fresh prod. busi- ness in 1945, and later a general dealer’s busi- ness. Public acitivities: Chairman, Springfield Vernacular School Trust; grantee Sandfields Ind. Sch.; life mem. S.A. Andhra Maha Sabha; interested in social movements. Address: Bus., Noodsburg Supply Store & Fresh Pro- duce, Springfield, P.O. Maidstone; Res., “Andra Rest”, Box 33, Maidstone, Natal. NAIDOO, Kotiah Govindsamy, farmer and bus. owner; b. Roosfontein, 1924; educ. Welbedacht; m. d. of R. M. Naidoo of Chatsworth, 3 s., 3 d. Bus.: Umhlatuzana Township Bus Service. Public activities: Grantee and trustee Welbedacht Govt-aided Indian School; vice-chair. Natal Indian Farmers’ Union; INDIAN WHO’S WHO vice-chair Natal Indian Banana Growers’ Assoc.; vice-chair. Pinetown and District Indian Child Wel- fare Soc.; chair. Welbedacht Goodwill Social Club; chair. Welbedacht Tamil School Comm.; ex.-mem. Rover Crew; mem. Welbedacht F.C. Address: :Box 6, Hillary, Durban. NAIDOO, Mannie Rattay; market and commission agent; s. of Rathansamy Rattay; b. Nigel on Aug. 4, 1913; m. Salatchee, d. of Raji Pillay; 4 s., 4 d. Busi- ness: Trading as Naidoo Fruit and Produce Supply; branch at Springs, est. 1936. Public activities: Mem. Nigel Tamil Sch. Board; Nigel Ind. Govt. Sch. Com- mittee; Nigel Municipal Advisory Board for Indians; mem. Cambridge F.C.; interested in education and sport. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 161; Res., 64 McKenzie Valley, Nigel. NAIDOO, Moonsamy Govindsamy, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S, (Edin.), L.R.F.P.S. (Glas.); medical prac- titioner; b. Durban, April 14, 1903; 4th s. of late M. Naidoo; m. Jankie, 2nd d. of R. Govindoo, of Dur- ban; educ. St. Aidan’s College, Carlisle St., Durban, S.A.N.C., Fort Hare, Edinburgh University. Since 1933 practising in Durban. Public activities: Keen on sport, played cricket and tennis for Edinburgh Indians; rep. Fort Hare at soccer and athletics. Club: Life mem. of the Indian Assn., Edinburgh. Address: Surgery, 122 Prince Edward St., Phone 24163; res., 37 Mallison Rd., Durban. NAIDOO, Moonsamy Kistnasamy, school master; b. Durban, May 15, 1893; educ. Durban; m. Edith, Gonid= Of: <A HE Peters. Joined © staff of Umgeni Govt. In- dian School 1909; transferred to Lady- smith as headmaster, Govt. Indian School 1914; re-transferred to Umgeni Govt. Ind. School as headmaster in 1916; in 1934 was headmaster of Pine- town Govt. Indian School; retired in 1953. Public activities: Pres. of the first Indian Teachers’ Soc., 1920; pres. Natal Indian Teachers’ Soc., 1930-31, gen. sec. 1929-30; elevated to life vice-pres. 1933; first pres. of the SA.LL.T.A. 1933, foundation mem. Moonlighters TiC, councillor and vice-pres. of the D.D.LF.A.; rep. Durban at soccer for 24 years; capt. Natal in 1930; vice-capt. Sam China Cup tourney at Port Elizabeth and Kimberley; played for Sydenham F.C.; vice-capt. of school C.C. 1929; played for Durban in inter-town cricket; mem. of Natal Indian Teachers’ eleven 1930; founder of Pinetown Indian Child Welfare Soc.; first sec. Motala Lads Hostel, Wyebank. Rec.: Tennis and cricket. Address: 35 Stanfield Lane, Pinetown, Natal, Phone 76879. THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, Moonsamy Kistasamy, sec. to Durban Bus Owners’ Assoc., and transport operator; b. Verulam, Natal, July 18, 1905, 2nd s. of late S. M. Naidoo of Durban; m. Soubykum, e. d. of Mr. Savabathy Moodley of Durban, 4 s. Prop. of Victorians Motor Transport; est. passenger transport operator in 1939. Address: Bus., Phone 20945 Durban; res., 76 Wills Rd., Durban, Phone 29245. NAIDOO, Narain- samy Govindsamy; b. 1921, Port Elizabeth, e. s. of N. Naidoo; educ. Dower Sch., Weis Sch.; m. e. d. of C. A. Pillay of P.E., 2 s., ld. After leaving school con- tinued studies by pte. tuition. Public activi- ties: Founder Indian Girl Guide Move- ment in P.E. 1954; joined scouts 1938; later became _ scout master and appointed Dist. | Commissioner in 1951; pres. of S.A. Weight Lifting Federation, now vice-pres.; pres. E.P. Amateur Weight Lifting since 1947; founda- tion mem. Daffodils F.C. 1940; sec. Daffodils 1940- 43; capt. Daffodils 1942-43-45; hon. life vice-pres., foundation mem. Daffodils C.C.; sec. 1947-48-49; hon. life vice-pres. from 1950; rep. E.P. at Sam China Tournament, C.T. 1939-1941, P.E., 1943 Durban, 1945 Johannesburg, 1947 E.L., 1949 Dur- ban; mem. Siva Subramoniar Temple and Saras- wathee Instit. Rec.: Fishing, cycling. Address: 39 South Beach Terrace, Port Elizabeth. NAIDOO, Narain- samy Moonsamy; Goodwill Tailors; b. Tongaat, Natal, June 14, 1916; educ. at Ladysmith Ind. Govt. Sch. Business; Took up tailoring and settled in Pietermaritzburg in 1936; later started own business as Goodwill Tailors and Outfitters. Public activities: Pat- ron, Higher Gr. Sch. Tennis Club; patron Y. Natalians Football & Cricket Club; pat- ron, M.I.L.T.; and has been vice-captain and auditor; vice-pres. Royals C. Club; interested in reading and fishing. Address: Bus., 155 Retief St., Phone 21047, Pietermaritzburg; Res., 195a Retief St., Phone 25243, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 149 NAIDOO, Moonsamy Naraisimulu (Sunny), clerk; b. Durban, 1934, e. s. of Moonsamy Naidoo of Durban; educ. M. L. Sultan Tech. College, com- pleted J.C. in 1956; free lance photographer, later joined King Edward VIII Hospital as a clerk. Public activities: Treas. Bellair Social and Sport Club; mem. F.O.S.A., Bellair Branch; Bellair Educ. Soc.; Child Welfare Soc.; foundation mem. Durban Inter- national Parliament; playing mem. of Sea View Old Boys’ F.C.; vice-pres. Young Lads F.C.; mem. of Sea View School Cricket Club. Rec.: Sport, photo- graphy, journalism. Address: 52 Philhaven Rd., Bellair, Durban. NAIDOO, Naransamy Manickum, gnrl. dir.; b. Jhb., 1905; s. of V. N. Naidoo; educ. Jhb. Ind. Govt. Sch.; m. Parvathi, 4 s., 3 d. Succeeded father’s business, est. 1912, known as_ Naidoo’s Store, which he carried on till 1938. Public activities: Ass. sec. & treas. T, Tamil Benefit Soc.; pres. Jhb. Ind. Y.M. Cul- tural Inst.; pres. Fed. T. Organisation; vice- ia pres. Hindu Sabha Sch. Com.; pres. H. Prayer Cl.; com. mem. T.I. Congress; joint sec. T.I. Lawn Tennis Assn.; first record clerk T. Col. C. Union; hon. sec. Sunday Soccer League; was treas. Melrose Siva Subramoniar Temple, Jhb.; pres. of Prayer Class Meetings; assisted in the building of the Hindu Sabha Hall, Krause St., Vrededorp; interested in bridge playing. Address: 14 18th St., Pageview, Johannesburg. NAIDOO, Papiah Moonsamy, general dealer and farmer; b. Hlovo, Natal, May 5, 1905, e s. of Papiah Naidoo; m. Kannamah, e. d. of Ramana ‘Naidoo of Fenniscowles, 6 s., 4 d.; educ. Umbogin- twini Indian School and Higher Grade School, Durban. Est. bus. in 1929, now in partnership with brother and trading as Highway Farmers’ i Trading Co. (Pty.) Ltd., and as P. M. Naidoo Bros. at Sparks Rd., Overport; interested in all aspects of community life. Address: Bus., 102a Prince Edward St., Durban, Phone 26285 and P.O. Box 7, Westville, Natal; res., New Germany.

---

## Page 6

150 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO NAIDOO, Parasa- radhi Abboy; _ busi- nessman; b. Verulam, Nov. 25, 1893; s. of Parasaradhi Naidoo; educ. Verulam, Rail- way, St. Anthony’s & Umgeni Govt. Sch.; m. d. of Bob K. C. Naidoo, of Umgeni; after her death m. Baygum; s. of Swamy- dhan Naidoo, Caven- dish, Natal; 3 s.. 4 d. Business: Man. direc- tor Abboysons (Pty.) Ltd., est. 1952, general dealers; employed at African Assoc. Agen- cies & Stevedoring Ltd. 1910-51. Public activities: Assisted in compiling the Thavaram Thiruvasagam, a Tamil religious publication; compiled a Tamil Who’s Who in 1927 assisted by Mr. G. R. Naidoo; a classical Tamil scholar and a prominent member of the Tamil and Andhra community; an organiser, tutor, play- wright and actor to several dramatic companies; one- time sub-editor of the “Vivekabhanoo” and pres. of Durban Tamil Agam. Public activities: In 1912 chairman, patron and sec. Point Y.M. Soc.; com. mem. Sentamil School; council mem. Stri Vaythia- natha Esparar Temple since 1916. now chairman; trustee, Umhloti Drift Hindu Temple; council mem. N.T. Vedic Soc. Recreation: Reading and writing. Address: Bus., 27 Mansfield Road; Res., 30 Ritson Road, Phone 45074, Durban. NAIDOO, Punniah Alfred, merchant; b. Aug. 1906, Benoni, 5th s. of late Vengtas Naidoo, Benoni; educ. Benoni; m. d. of B. Korrie, 3 s. Est. own bus. as general dealer in 1944, trad- ing under the style of Phoenix Trading Stores. Public activi- -ties: Treas. Benoni Tamil School Board. Address: No. 6 17th St., Asiatic Bazaar, Benoni, Transvaal. NAIDOO, Ponnusamy Munisamy, garage prop. and cartage contractor; b. Edendale, Sept., 1921, ¢. s. of Munisamy Naidoo of Edendale; m. Sth d. of V. Reddy of Weenen, 2 s., 3 d.; educ. Sutherlands Govt. Indian School; on leaving school took up farming; was first Indian to operate a milk depot in a system advantageous to the public; later started cart. contr. bus., under the style, Home-craft Cartage Building Material Suppliers; also est. the All-hour Service Station and Garage, the most up-to-date service station on the Edendale Main Rd. Public activities: Foundation mem. of the First Tamil School in Edendale; donated a plot of ground for the erection of a school in 1955. Rec.: Motoring. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 1, Main Rd., Edendale, Maritzburg, Phone 42, NAIDOO, Ramangem Gopaul, produce dlr.; b, 1923, PE, s. of late V. R. Naidoo; educ. Union School, Fairview, P.E.; m. Manghta, d. of late A. Padayachee of Kimberley. Assoc. with father’s bus, took control in 1946, trad- ing as Ideal Fruiterers; est. another bus. in 1957, trading as Choice Groceries. Public activities: Treas. of P.E. Saras- wathee Instit.; mem. of S. S. Alayam; mem. Thirikoctum; mem. P.E. Table Tennis and Lawn Tennis Club. Rec.: Motoring. Address: Bus., 55 Walmer Rd., Port Elizabeth; Res., 4 Seymour St., South End, Port Elizabeth, Phone 26456. NAIDOO, Ramoor- thee Lutchmial; prog. tailor; b. Oct. 20, 1922, Durban; s. of Gopaul Lutchmiah Naidoo; educ. A. Y.S. Ind. Sch.; m.; 1 d. Business: Pro- prietor Saville Row Tailors; est. in 1947, specialising in ladies’ and gent’s bespoke tai- loring; introduced first hand tailored drape suit among non-Euro- Jeins in Durban. Won Bay Scouts Sch. Shield in 1937-38 in first-aid competition. Public activities: Ex-mem. D. Indian Life Saving Gymnasium; patron, Premier Box- ing and Physical Culture Club, Recreation: Football, swimming and fishing. Club: Orient Angling Club. Address: Bus., 6a Saville St., Durban; Res., 18 Dro- more Road, Mayville, Durban. , THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, Ramsamy Govindrajulu, hosp. clerk; b. Durban, Dec. 23, 1923, e& s. of Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Naidoo of Durban; m., 5 s. 1 d.3 educ. Pmburg. After leav- ing school was employed in catering trade, thereafter took up position as hosp. clerk; is sec. to Bellair Social and Sporting Club, County I.F.A. and County C.U.; is pres. of Bellair Ratepayers’ Assoc., Orient Swim- ming Club and the King Edward VIII Hospital F.C.; is record clerk Central Debating Union. Address: =e 34 Rosewarne Rd., Bellair, Durban, Phone 18971. NAIDOO, Ramsamy Krishnasamy (Kitty Boyd); b. 1906, Pmburg, e. s. of late Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Naidoo; educ. York Road School; mm. Marcia, e. d. of Mr. and Mrs. Beukes of Pretoria, 4 s., 1 d. Won a Diploma for the Art of Icing Con- fectionery 1926; was jt. sec. Colonial-born Settlers Assoc. and vice-pres. M. Indian Congress 1954; sec. Ratepayers’ Assoc. 1951-54, auditor Ratepayers’ Assoc. 1955; pres. Tamil Educ. Soc. 1950-54; auditor and trustee Raisethorpe Sanathan Soc. 1954 and Arya Nauk Sabha 1954; trustee Raisethorpe Recreation Club 1954; vice-pres. Indian Child Welfare 1955-58; pres. Pmburg. Athletic and Cycling Club 1954; council mem. Regional Food Comm. 1942; chair. Natalians Sports Club 1930-56; manager Juvenile Inter-town M.D.I.F.A. 1934; vice- pres. Goodwill Social Club, Raisethorpe; chair. Swami Nichalanda Reception Comm.; played soccer Aryan F.C. and vice-capt. 1926; Stella F.C. 1928; Stella F.C. and vice-pres. 1929; pres. Y.N.F.C. 1930- 56; councillor M.D.I.F.A. 1932-34; selector junior 1932-34, senior 1936; also conducts Land and Estate Agency—Kitty Boyd Agency; Commissioner for Oaths. Address: 207 Retief St., Pietermaritzburg. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 1St NAIDOO, Ramswami Moonswami, F.B.A.A. (Lon.), F.LA.C., F.1. Com. (Eng.) (Regis- tered Accountant of Lon.), Commissioner for Oaths; b. Tongaat, Natal, 1900; e. s. of late P. Ramswami Naidoo, formerly of Newcastle; m. e. d. of late R. K. Naidoo, Durban North; educ. Convent Sch., New- castle, Fairbreeze Ind. Sch., Stamford Hill Commercial College & private studies; gained . ' Commercial Teacher’s Diploma in Commerce and Accountancy and was Principal of School of Bookkeeping and Accountancy. Fellow of The British Association of Accountants and Auditors, London. Business: Commenced own business in 1928 as Business Consultant, Secretary of Companies, Estate Administrator, Real Estate and Financial Agent; organised and founded “Library Building Society” (registered under Building Societies Act as Permanent Society) in 1947 (the only Institu- tion of its kind in South Africa, controlled by In- dians); its secretary and manager since inception. Public activities: Hon. Auditor, Natal Teachers’ Soc. and several other public societies and institutions; Council Member, M. L. Sultan Technical College; Trustee, Natal Indian Blind Society and official of numerous societies, trusts and sports associations. Add.: Bus., 71 Albert Street, Durban, Phone 2-2856; Res., “Mangala Villa,” 115 45th Avenue, Sherwood, Durban, Phone 88-2601. NAIDOO, Savery Ragen, watchmaker; b. 1926, P.E.; educ. Patterson High Sch.; m. Jay, d. of A. S. Pillay of E.L., 2 s., 1 d. Est. bus. 1951, trading as Jays Bar- gain House; now con- ducting watch re- pairer’s bus. was apprenticed to Geo. Naidoo in younger days; also conducts Land and_ Estate Agency; mem. of Ind. Assoc. in EL; treas. of Hindu Reli- gious Protection Soc.; mem. of E.L. Tennis Club. Rec.: Tennis and motor- a Address: 6a Milner Rd., East London, Phone 3662.

---

## Page 7

152 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 153 NAIDOO, Seetham- baram Nellathumby (Bobby); b. Pmburg., Dec. 7, 1926, s. of Nellathumby, occ. watchmkr.; m. d. o. E. Dickson, bus owner; educ. Woodlands Ind. High School and Tech. Instit. Trading as Empire Watch- makers, 488 Church St. Public activities: M.D. Darts Union 1952-55; pres. Natal Darts Union 1955-58; pres. Denver D.C. 1950; vice-pres. Den- ver D.C.; vice-pres. M.LT.S.S.; ex-treas. M.LT.S.S. 1949-53; ex-sec./ treas. H.Y.M.A. 1954; councijlor M. Tech. Instit. 1954-58: vice-pres. M.T.T. Club; treas. Midlands Indian Lawn Tennis Assoc.; councillor M.D.LF.A.; vice-pres. Crusaders F.C.; mem. Deepavali Cheer Soc.; mem. F.O.S.A. Pmburg Area Care Comm.; ex-pres. and treas. Pmburg. Sunmarka Sunghum. Rec.: Darts, table tennis, tennis. Address: 488 Church St., Pietermaritzburg, Phone 26598. NAIDOO, Seeramalu, coy. sec.; b. Umzinto, March 1, 1914, 0. s. of late Dhalapiah Naidoo of Umzinto; m. Muagamah, d. of Narainsamy of Merebank, 2s. 4d; educ. Umzinto Govt.-aided Indian School and M. L. Sultan Technical College, Durban. Sec./ bookkeeper in the employ of City Metal Products, Clairwood. Public activities: Auditor Pathmajurani Andhra Sabha (Clairwood); auditor Clairwood Tamil Institute; auditor Clairwood Angling Assoc. Address: 49 Sir Kurma Reddy Rd., Clairwood, Natal. NAIDOO, Sooba Rama, Commissioner for Oaths; e. s. of Sooba Naidoo; b. Pmburg. 1885; educ. St. Paul’s School & Boys’ Model School (European), Indian High School and pte. study; m. Govinda- mall in 1907. Early assoc. with sport, rep. Pmburg. at soccer; joined admin., attain- ing highest offices in many branches of sports in Pmburg. & Natal; hon. life vice- pres. Natal Indian Football Assoc.; prominent social worker and sup- porter of vernacular educ.; first opposition leader and then Prime Minister of Pmburg. Indian Parlia- mentary Debating Society; former trustee and founder and mem. of H.Y.M.A. and trustee of Aryan Benevolent Soc., Pmburg.; sec. Pmburg. Indian Relief Comm.; vice-chair. of Indo-European Joint Council, Pmb.; in the field of Ind. politics has done outstanding work; sec. Natal Indian Congress (Pmburg. Branch) and later sec. S.A.LC.; mem. of Consulting Comm. to Paddison deputation, with which travelled all parts of Natal, and of Habibullah and Hussain delegations at the Ist and 2nd Round Table Conferences between India and Union; drafts- man to Congress, being responsible for preparation of many memoranda on Indian question; one of chief spokesmen on Indian affairs in S.A.; former pres. of the S.A.I.O. 1949. Publication: Newspaper articles and jt. editor of “Sastri Speaks”. Was first Indian to serve on Govt. Comm., being mem. of the Indian Colonisation Inquiry Comm.; mem. of Indian Pene- tration Commission (a Govt. Commission) presided over by Mr. Justice F. N. Broome; mem./sec. of S.A. Indian Congress Deputation, which toured India in 1946 on Union Govt.’s Asiatic Land Tenure Bill, etc.; recipient of the King’s Silver Jubilee Medal and Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Medal for merit- orious public services; appeared several times before select comms. and led important deputations before Ministers of the Union Govt. He and his wife celebrated Gold Jubilee of their wedding in the City Hall, March 17, 1957. Sworn Tamil Translator and Interpreter of Supreme Court, Natal Provincial Division. Hobby: Reading and research work and gardening. Address: Land and Estate and General Agent, Fraser Lane, Pietermaritzburg, Phone 22257. NAIDOO, Subba Thamodaran, general and insurance agent; b. Oct. 7, 1899, at La Mercy, Natal; edue. Fairbreeze Ind. Sch., Teacher’s Fourth Cl. Cert.; m. Valliamah, d. of late Rangia Nai- doo, formerly of Stan- derton; 5 s., 1 di; 13 years teacher, Educ. Dept., in schools at Fairbreeze and Ton- gaat. Business: 1937, agent, National Mut. Life Assoc. of Austra- lasia Ltd.: the British Insurance Co. Ltd.; rep. Caltex Africa Ltd.; com. of oaths, dist. of Inanda, 1943. Public activities: Trustee, Tongaat Hindu Sama- rasa Bodha Andhra Assoc.; trustee, S.A. Andhra Maha Sabha; member several other organisations. Toured India in 1927 and 1950. Address: Bus., Phone 26, Box 24, Tongaat; Res., High SC, Tongaat, Natal. . NAIDOO, V. C. Dayanand, estate agent; b. August 19,1907, Pmburg, s. of V. C. Naidoo; educ, Higher Grade School, Pmburg.; m., 6 s., 4 d. Ardent worker for Divine Life Soc. Rec.: Gardening and tennis. Address: 15 Gertrude St., Pmburg. "0 THE S. M. NAIDOO FAMILY 2&7 NAIDOO, Srunvasa- loo Munsamy (late); b. Umhalali, Natal, 1895, died April 29, 1954; m. Govindamah Naidoo; founder of the well known estab., Peter’s Lounge; dis- posed of this bus. in 1939, in 1944 estd. Goodwill Lounge, one of the most up-to-date restaurants in S.A. Was a leading figure among the Indian community. NAIDOO, Lutchman (Billy), osteopath, D.M.O.; b. Durban, 1925; 3rd _s. of late S. M. Naidoo; educ. at St. Anthony’s Sch., Sastri College, Croy- don and London Polytechnics; m.; prac- tisingin London. Rec.: Cricket and _ tennis. Address: 9 Selwyn House, Lansdown Terr., London. Proprietors: GOODWILL LOUNGE NAIDOO, Vengtas (Namee), restaurant- eur; b. Durban, 1919; e. s. of late S. M. Naidoo; educ. St. Anthony’s Sch. and Sastri College; m. Pushpanjala, 3rd d. of Gangaraju Reddy, of Stanger; One of dir. of Goodwill Lounge, one of the few estab- lishments where all Taces meet. Also caters for boarders. Rec.: Boxing and ath- letics. Add.: Bus., Goodwill Lounge, 38 Victoria St. (Durban); Res., 34 Lorne St., Durban. NAIDOO, Go pau! (Pumpy), restaurant- eur; b. Durban, 1922; 2nd s. of late S. M. Naidoo; educ. at St. Anthony’s Sch. and Sastri College, and Lovedale College, Cape Province. One of the directors of the Goodwill Lounge. Has organised numer- ous dances and shows in aid of charity. First non-uniformed Indian to receive the “Priory Vote of Thanks” from the Venerable Order of the Hospital of St. John’s of Jerusalem. Takes a great interest in boxing organisations and athletics. Pub. act.: Patron of the Natal N.E.A.B.A. Central T.C., Jackie Pillay’s Physical Culture Academy, and Leagurs Boxing School; hon. mem. of the Durban Indian Life Savers’ Club. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., Goodwill Lounge, 38 Victoria St.; Res., 34 Lorne St., Durban. NAIDOO, Srikrishna (Bobby), journalist; b. Durban; 4th s. of late S. M. Naidoo; educ. at St. Anthony’s Sch. and Sastri College, Durban; m. Sheila Nehra, of London; 1 d. Prop. “Stragglers” Night Club, 8 Tower Court Rd., London, W.C.2. Correspondent for “The Leader” in London. Address: 15 Palliser Rd., Baron’s Court, London, West 14. ORIEL

---

## Page 8

154 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO > The Tharley J. Naidoo Family < NAIDOO, Tharley Juggiah, merchant; b. Bobbili, Madras, 1896; 3rd s. of late T. S. Naidoo; m. Errama, e. d. of E, P. Naidoo, late of Stanger; 4 s., 3 d.; educ.: Private study; came to Natal in 1910, settled in Tinley Manor. Bus.: Co-partner in bus. A. P. Naidoo & Co., Tinley Manor, in 1921, now its sole proprietor; opened branch in Stanger 1932 as A. P. Naidoo & Co. (Pty.), Ltd.; lost son (Jack Naidoo) in car crash in Durban in 1948. Pub. act.i Trustee, S.A. Andhra Maha Sabha (Durban); patron, Shree Soobramonium Temple (Tinley Manor); mem, Tinley Manor Sch. comm. Address: Bus., Phone 21 (Umhlali), P.O. Chakas Kraal; Res., Tinley Manor, Natal. NAIDOO, Juggiah Appal (late) B.D.S. (University of Durham); dental surgeon; b. July 19, 1922, Tinley Manor, Natal; e. s. of T. J. Naidoo of Tinley Manor; educ. Tinley Manor Ind. Sch. and Sastri College, Durban, matriculated in 1941. Bus.: Dental surgeon. Entered Sutherland Dental Sch., University of Durham, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, graduated in 1953, became council mem. Dental Students’ Soc., mem. Durham Students’ Med. Council, ex pres. and sec. Newcastle-upon-Tyne Ind. Assoc., in 1952/53 was on the Editorial Comm. of Fedind Quarterly Journal; was appointed House Surgeon, Dental Hospital, Newcastle-upon- Tyne. Toured Scotland, N. Ireland, Eire, France, Germany, Switzerland and Italy. Died July 31, 1955. NAIDOO Juggiah (Dick), businessman; b. Tinley Manor, Natal, Aug. 3, 1930; 3rd s. of T. J. Naidoo, Tinley Manor; educ. Tinley Manor Ind. Sch., Tongaat High Sch. and Sastri College, Durban. Bus.: Assoc. with his father’s bus., A. P. Naidoo (Pty.), Ltd., Stanger, since 1950. Pub. act.: Takes an interest in all community welfare organisations. Rec.: Soccer and cricket. Address: Bus., Tinley Manor, Phone 21 (Umhlali), P.O. Chakas Kraal, Natal. NAIDOO, Logan Juggiah, student at Cape University; b. 7 July 1953, Tinley Manor, Natal; y. s. of T, J. Naidoo, Tinley Manor; educ. Tinley Manor Ind. Sch. and Tongaat High Sch.; after miatriculating in 1951, studied at the Natal University; student at the University of Cape Town. Rec.: Cricket and soccer. Address: Res., “Waldfriedien”, Beresford Rd., P.O. Woodstock, C.P. THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDOO, V. Krish- nasamy (B.A.), school master; b. Pmburg., 1912, o. s. of V. Naidoo; educ. Stanger Indian School, Higher Grade Indian School, Pmburg., Sastri Col- lege and Natal Uni- versity; m. Visalat- chee, 2nd d. of T. T. Pillay of Durban, 3 s., 1 d. Began teach- ing in 1934 at Lady- smith, later at Depot Road Indian School, Durban; vice - pres. Greyville Indian Sch. principal, Arya Yuvuk Sabha School. Public activities: General sec. Natal Indian Teachers’ Soc. 1950-53; keenly interested in tennis and cricket. Address: 16 First Ave., Durban, Phone 60471. NAIDOO, Veerasamy Subramoney (Daddy); b. Clairwood, Durban, Dec. 13, 1919; 3rd s. of Veersamy Naidoo; educ. Clairwood Govt. Aided Ind. School & M. L. Sultan Tech. College; m. Mumie, d. of Mariemuthoo Pad- ayachee, Clairwood; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Nai- doo’s Butchery, est. by his father in 1928, and was taken over in 1942; a well-known signwriter. Public acti- vities: Ex-pres. Fosa ’ (Clairwood); sec. Ind. Educ. Soc.; exec. mem. C. Sch. O.B. Club; exec. mem. Pathmaguranni Andhra Sabha; mem. C. L. & D. Soc.; C. Ind. Youth Club; mem. C. & D. Ind. P. Assn.; Horseshoe F.C.; D.L.C. Wel. Soc., Clairwood; S.C. Non-Euro. Angling Assn.; sec. D. & D. Master Butchers’ Assn.; sup. Clairwood H.M. & Gen. Ceme- teries; found. patron, M. L. Sultan T. College; donated 500 guineas to the M. L. Sultan College, and in recog- nition of this the second floor in the college buildings has been named after the donor; interested in fishing, billiards, table tennis and darts. Address: Bus., 589 South Coast Road, Clairwood, Phone 81476; Res., 91 Horseshoe Road, Phone 819741, Clairwood. NAIDOO, Venkiah Yoganathan; b. August 23, 1931, e. s. of Venkiah Naidoo; educ. Greenwood Park Indian School; m. Pushpahkenthi, sister of late Dr. Soma Pillay of Cape Town, 1 s. After leaving school, started as a doctor’s receptionist for two years, then commenced training as a nurse in 1950, at King Edward VIII Hospital and qualified in 1954, Public activities; Takes a keen interest in the INDIAN WHO’S WHO 155 affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Cricket, soccer and tennis. Address: Res., 230 Smithfield Rd., Kenville, Durban, Phone 834069. NAIDOO, Vishnu, photographer, colour specialist; b. Sept. 17, 1932, Sea View, Ntl.; s. of Dadi Veerasamy Naidoo; educ. Sastri College, Dbn. Busi- ness: Syntho - color Film Laboratories, est. 1953; undertakes colour film processing and printing; __ full technicolour _ illustra- tive & portrait photo- graphy; specialises in commercial and ad- vertising slides; won merit places in four S.A. exhibits at D. Cen. Inst. Photo Exhibition; won merit with colour photographs of Indian dancing; mem. Royal Photog. Soc. (London); free lance photographic journalist; did research photographs for N.U.C.; has submitted 8 photographs to Royal Photographic Soc.; four more to be accepted before securing A.R.P.S.; has taken colour photographs for use on calendars. Address: Bus., 201 Lakhani Chambers, Saville St., Durban; Res., Phone 819923, 101 Railway Road, Sea View, Durban, Natal. NAIDU, _ Kirstappa Chengappa, business- man; b. at Tongaat, 1911, s. of C. Naidu; educ. at Fairbreeze Govt.-aided Indian Sch.; m. Narainama, d. of E. Naidu, 5 s., 2 d. Est. business in 1952, trading as Elysium; formerly employed by Gandhi & Co., and Tongaat Company; later est. taxi bus. Public activities; Was vice- pres. N.C.LF.A.; was treas.s Samasara Bodha Andhra Assoc.; former director of Bharat Co-operative Soc.; former pres. of Tongaat Recreation Union; mem. of the Tongaat Indian Sch. Trust Board; treas. of the Ton- gaat Indian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; chair. of the Tongaat United Orchestra; vice-pres. Tongaat Indian Child Welfare Soc.; vice-pres. Inanda Non-European Taxi Owners Association; treasurer of the Natal Taxi Assoc.; trustee of the Tongaat Indian Eisteddfod; exec. mem. of the Tongaat Traders Assoc.; vice- pres. of the Tongaat Indian F.C.; exec. mem. T.S.B.A.A.; life mem. of the Andhra Maha Sabha of S.A. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 44, Tongaat, Phone 67; Res., Metcalf Rd., Tongaat, Phone 35.

---

## Page 9

156 THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIDU, Govindasamy Somasundram, B.A.; educ. Sastri College and N.U.C. Public Act.: Taught at Sastri College; later took up Law; Treas. N.I.C. for a number of years; prominent in Educational and Social Circles. Add.: 114-116 Queen St., Durban. NAIDU, Mahdava Venu Gopal; herb spe- cialist; e. s. of M. Naidu; b. Ootaca- mund, India, 1892; m.; 2 s., 1 d.; educ. Wes- Jeyan College, Roye- pettah, Madras; came to Natal in 1905 and settled in Durban. Business: M. V. G. Naidu, Himalayan Herbal Specialist, medicine dealer, toilet and novelties store. Public activities: Pat- ron, Ind. Golf Union; vice-pres. D. Ind. Golf Club; adj. Ind. Sec. Eisted; ex-mem. Advisory Board, S.A.B.C.; mem. Child Welfare Soc. and F.0.S.A._ Address: Bus., 118a Victoria Street, Durban, Phone 25866; Res., 76 Ritson Road, Durban. - NAIDU, Thiruvang- dum Vartha; retired master butcher; b. Dist. Salem, India, in 1872; s. of Thiruvang- dum Naidu; educ. in India; m. Muniamah, only d. of Ramsamy Naidu; 5 s., 3 d. Busi- ness: V. Naidu & Sons, butchers, 147 Ind. Mkt., Durban; branch, 172 Horseshoe Road, Clairwood, carried on by his son. A Tamil scholar. Served in the Second Boer War, after which served for 3 years in cargo boats to many parts of the world. Public activities: Founda- tion mem. Pathmajuram Andhra Sabha (Clairwood); patron Andhra Maha Sabha of S.A. Address: Res., 166 Horseshoe Road, Clairwood, Natal. NAIK, Dhirubhai Premabhai; bookkeeper, secretary of companies and general agent; s. of Premabhai Naik; b. India, March 20, 1920; educ. in India and South Africa; m. Shantaben, d. of B. D. Naik; 1 s., 4 d. Business: Naik’s Popular Bazaar, est. 1950. Public activities: Mem. Transvaal Hindu Samaj; a generous donor and a silent worker. Address: 29e Commissioner Street, Johannesburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO NAIKER, Govind- samy Soobiah, school teacher; b. Pmburg., 1923, s. of M: G. Soobiah; educ. Wood- lands High School; m. Santhamaray, d. of V. Moodley of Dur- ban. Public activities: Sec. and treas. Pmburg. Indian Lawn Tennis Club for 14 years, now hon. life f vice-pres.; was chair. ; } and sec. Pmburg. I a ; Boys’ Scout Assoc. Lie 4 j \ - for 20 years; awarded ae a / / Scouts Wood Badge; now Dist. Scout Commissioner; mem. S.A. Red Cross.Soc., and for 9 years its commissioner; gained 10 years gen. efficiency service medal and gold medal in first aid and home nursing; awarded S.A. Medal for war services. Address: 466 Church St., Pmburg. NAIKER, Nacha- ramma, teacher; b. Pmburg. 1920, e. d. of G. Naiker; educ. Woodlands and Girls’ High Schools. Com- menced teaching at E.P.S. School in 1941; also taught vernacular at “ H.Y.M.A., Pmburg.; mem. N.LT.S.; asst. Guide Commissioner 1955; appointed Dis- trict Commissioner Pmburg. Indian Gir] Guides Assoc. 1958; Vice -chairlady Priburg. Indian Tech. Students’ Soc. 1958; treas. F.O.S:A. 1953-54; vice- chairlady and treas. and mem. Tech. Students’ Soc.; treas. 1953-55; chairlady Ways and Méans Comm.: school delegate to Midlands Sports Assoc. and to Natal School Sports Assoc.; toured Lourenco Marques and Rhodesia 1952; toured India 1955; toured Union 1945, 1950. Rec.: Needlework. Address: 476 Church St., Pmburg. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 157 NAIKER, _ Sellapan Govindasamy, general dealer; b. Payanoor, Madras, y. s. of S. Naiker of Madras; educ. India; m. Saw- baikum, e. d. of V. Govender of Madras, 2 $s, 10 4d. Was engaged in catering trade at Mooi River; later farmed near Pmburg; ardent worker for religious causes; performs reli- gious ceremonies; mem. Siva Subra- moniar and Mariam Temple; mem. Siva Sithantha Bajana Mandam, now chair. Address: 530 Church St., Pmburg. NAIKER, V. S.; clerk; b. P.M.Burg. Natal, May 1, 1886; s. of Veerasamy Naiker; educ. Methodist Ind. Govt. Aided School, P.M.Burg, and private study; widower, 3 s., 2 d. Business: Partner Sita Trading Co., whl. merchants, Durban. Public activities: Asst. teacher 1896-1902; first sec. H.Y.M.A., Pieter- maritzburg, 1905; sec. J.H.B. Vania Sabah, 1918-28; chairman, Y. M. Society, Joh’burg, 1919-22: first sec. Mel- rose Hindu Temple, 1919-24: sec. T.B. Soc. 1919-29: sec. “Maikanda Mitran”, a Tamil paper; trustee and pres. Johannesburg Hindu T. Inst. since 1940; chair- man Inst. Tamil Sch.; founder and chairman Tamil Pauper Cremation Fund. Visited India 1905 and 1939. Visited U.K., France, Italy and Middle East 1956. Address: 220 Market Street, Johannesburg, Tvl. NAIR, Nanu (K. N. Peter); b. Malbar, Madras, e. s. of Narain Ezuthachan (late); educ. at Malbar; m. Sobakium, e. d. of late M. Moodley of Durban, 2 s., 2 d. Arrived in S.A. in 1904; was employed by the Natal Railways. Public activities: Was chair. of the Spearman Road Tamil School; treas. of the Durban Hotel Employers’ Union; patron of St. Aidan’s Boys’ Club and Indian Danacagara Fund. Rec.: Billiards and reading. Address: 18 Tulip Place, Springfield, Durban. NAINAAR, Mahalin- gam Yagambaram; businessman and book- keeper; b. Jan. 27, 1900, Verulam, Natal; m. Seevabacium, e. d. of late Rangasamy Govinden Padayachee, of P.E.; 1 s.; educ. Higher Grade Indian Sch.; Ind. Tech. Inst., Durban. Business: Prop. firm of M. Y. Nainaar, est. 1918. Public activities: Ex- sec.-treas., ch., trustee and vice-pres. Vedic Lawn Tennis Club; Central Cricket Club; Students Soc. of I. T. Inst.; sec. Ind. Soc. Service Com.; Natal Indian Farmers? Assoc.; Durban Ind. Fruiterers’ Assoc.; Durban Ind. Tearoom Owners’ & Fresh Produce Dealers’ Assoc.; vice-pres. Natal Tamil Vedic Soc.; S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; vice-pres. Natal Lawn Tennis Assoc.; hon. auditor, S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; patron, Central C.C. and Daffodils F.C.; mem. Indo-European Coun- cil and National Veld Trust; vice-pres. Daffodils F.C. Recreation: Tennis, cricket, football; asst. sec. NI. Far, Assoc. Address: Bus., 153 Brook St., Durban; Res., Flat 14, Bodasingh’s Bldgs., 137 Brook St., Durban. oe ais NAIR, Kenneth Reu- ben, headmaster; b. 1909, Durban, s. of R. Nair; educ. St. Aidan’s Provincial Training College; m. Saraswati, d. of M. B. Maharaj, 2 s., 2 d. Qualified in 1923, promoted principal 1928 at Roosfontein Govt.-aided School, later transferred to St. Aidan’s Boys’ School 1939, Public activities: Mem. N.LT.S. since 1925; treas. of NLT. i 1929-30, 1933-38; vice-pres. 1955-56; exec. mem. for several years; pres. Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ Assoc. since 1947; Assist. Divisional Commissioner 1950; rep. N.I.T.S. at the Inst. Race Relations; foundation mem. F.O.S.A., served on working comm. for several years; was pres. Natal Indian Schools F.A.; was chair. Sydenham Branch N.LT.S. for 4 years: was chair. Springfield Ratepayers’ Assoc.; exec. mem. David Landau Community Centre. Address: 66 Vinca Rd., Springfield, Durban.

---

## Page 10

158 THE SOUTH AFRICAN NAIR, Matthew D., b. Durban, 1922; educ. St. Michael’s Govt.- aided Sch., Clairwood Ind. Senior Boys’ Sch.; s. o. late K. M. David Nair, a disabled soldier of World War I, and Mrs. Nair; served in 2nd World War (1940/1945) with the rank of Staff Sgt.; Pres. of the Natal In- dian Ex-Servicemen’s League (1957); Circuit Steward of the Dur- ban & Coast Method- ist Indian Mission; Sec. of the Methodist Men’s League (Natal District, 1957/1958); Chairman, Ind. Branch of the Methodist Men’s League; Repre- sented Natal Methodists at the (150th Anniversary) Annual Conference of the Methodist Church of South Africa at Cape Town in 1956; on the staff of the immigration Department, Point, Natal, since 1945. NANA, Jasmat, master tailor; s. of Nana Makan; b. at Matvad, Navsari, India; educ. Benoni Col’d Govt. School; m. Ratan, d. of Bhudia Rowjee; 1 s., 3 d. Business: J. Nanabhai, branch at 311 Marshall Street, Jeppe; mem. of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj. Address: 59 Beit St., Doornfontein, Johannesburg. NANABHAI, Chotubhai, general dealer; b. Delvadia, Surat, 1924, s. of N. Ramjeebhai; educ. Govt. Indian School, Jhb.; m. Laxmiben, d. of R. Hansjee, 4 s. Arrived in S.A. 1928, settled in Benoni, trading as China Silk Bazaar. Treas. of Benoni Hindu Seva Samaj. Rec.: Sport. Address: Stand 112, Fourth St., Cape Section, Benoni, Tvl. NARAN, Chotu; master tailor; s. of Naran Hira; b. in India; educ. Johannesburg Govt. Ind. School; m. Jamna Dhaya, d. of Dhaya Parshotam; 1 s., 3 d Business: Universal Tailors, est. 1950; traded as Rand Tailors at Maraisburg in 1944. Public activities; Mem. Vredons F.C., Hind C.C.; interested in phys. culture; supporter of social welfare activities. Address: 216 Main Road, Fordsburg, Transvaal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO NARAINSAMY, Jimmy, cartage con- tractor; b. in Durban 1909; educ. at Clair- wood Govt.-aided In- dian School. ~Bus.: Furniture removers; was formerly em- ployed at Challenors and Medwood Furni- ture Removers; est. own bus. in 1948; cartage contractor of all movable goods. Public activities: Foundation mem. of the Central L.T.C,; mem. F.O.S.A. Cato Manor. Area Care Comm.; foundation mem. and ex-treas. Cato Manor Benefit Club; ex-pres. Cato Manor Hindu Instit. Rec.: Sports. Address: Bus., 7 Progress Building, Durban; Res., 23 Andruth Rd., Mayville, Durban. —+— NARAN, Harilal Natha; merchant and company director; b. Durban, Oct. 30, 1909; s. of Natha Naran; m.; 6s. 1 d.; educ. St. Anthony’s School, Durban. Business: tr. as N. Naran (Pty.) Ltd., 147 Grey St.; Harilal Bros., 147 Grey St.; Durban Drapers (Pty.) Ltd., 474 West St.; took over father’s business, est. in 1905, and carried on as Natha Naran in 1929, extended as Harilal Bros., 159 Grey St., 1933, with the aid of brothers; @frector of N. Naran (Pty.) Ltd., Durban Drapers (Pty Ltd., Chonalal In- vestments (Pty.) Ltd.; ex-director Clarenth Invest- ments (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Mem. Indian Good- will Club; ex-sec. Kathiawad Hindoo ~Seva Samaj; founder, chairman and trustee of N. Naran Charity Trust. Recreation: Reading. Address: Res. and Bus., 147 Grey Street, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN NARAYADU, Amb- rose Gabriel; principal of school; b. Pentrich, Maritzburg, May 31, 1905; m. Lydia, e. d. of Paul Zechariah, of Maritzburg, on July 5. 1926; educ. Received prim. educ. at Suther- lands Govt. Aid. Ind. School; completed 10 courses in B.A. degree of Univ. of Natal. Prof. qual.; N.T.D. of Natal Educ. Dept., served under N.E.D. as asst. teacher since Aug. 1, 1917, at .the following schools: St. Aidan’s Boys’, Railway, Pietermaritzburg, Estcourt Govt., Higher Grade School, Durban, Umgeni Govt. and Greyville Govt.; appointed vice-principal at May- ville Govt.-Aided in July. 1947, principal of M.ES. in 1949 and since July, 1951, principal of Candella Samalan Govt.-Aided Sch. (formerly Candella Boys’). Sports: Was actively associated with the administration of many branches of sport in Weenen County, with headquarters at Estcourt; donor of floating trophy for five-a-side soccer in 1931 which is still being com- peted for annually by any five in Natal. At present actively interested in social work, being exec. member of F.O.S.A.; also chairman and treas. of Central Dur- ban Care Com.; mem. of Durban Ind. Child Welfare Society; also member of the Indian Advisory Com. of Durban and Dist. Ind. Road Safety Assoc. In- terested in seaside home for children. Organiser of Union and overseas tour of Ind. Teachers. Address: Candella Samalan School, 68 Palace Road, Mayville, Durban; Res., 48 Madras Road, Durban, Phone 35892. NARAYADU, Sam- son Christopher. schoolmaster; y. s. of late Narayadu; om. Jane, e. d. of Mrs. and late Mr. Ponnu- sami Sathianathan, 1 s., 1 d.; educ. Suther- lands and York Rd. Govt. Indian School (Pmburg) and St. Aidan’s Coll., Syden- ham. Started teach- ing at St. Aidan’s Coll., 1925, then at Springfield, Greytown, : Pinetown, now vice- ba principal St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, Syden- ham. Donated trophies for thrift at Greytown and Pinetown Schools, also for “all-round efficiency” at St. Aidan’s. Public activities: First sec. Pinetown and Suburban School Sports Assoc., and Pinetown Indian Child Welfare Soc.; was mem. Durban Indian Social Services Comm,; keen on soccer, tennis and social welfare work. Address: Sydenham, Durban. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 159 NARSI, Parboo, wholesale merchant; b. 1927, Dur- ban, e. s. of late N. Heera; educ. at Greyville Govt.- aided Indian School; m. Manibhen, e. d. of late Govind Nathoo of Ladvi, Surat. On leaving school went to India, returned in 1948, joined the firm of Parboo Narsi & Co., later took over his father’s bus. Public activities: Takes an active part in the affairs of the Hindu community. Rec.: Reading. Address: 110 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 24845. NATHA, Chagan; master tailor and out- fitter; s. of Natha Ruggha; b. at Nav- sari, India, on May 20, 1914; educ. Navsari Gujerati Sch., India; m. Pali, d. of Lulloo Ghela; 1 d. Business: Bendigo Master Tai- loring, tailors and out- fitters, 302a Commis- sioner Street, Jeppe, Johannesburg. Public activities: Com. mem. Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; chairman and treas. Shree Modh Yuvak Mandal; chair- man and manager, Azat C.C.; was vice-chairman Modhyuvak Mandal. Address: 302a Commissioner Street, Jeppe, Johannesburg. NATHANIEL, Rev. D. N., minister of religion; b. India 1908, s. of A. Nathaniel, Bachelor of Divinity. Has written commentaries on biblical books, I and II Timothy and Titus; editor of “Natal Geethamulu” (Telugu), “I Saw The Lord Working” (English) and editor of “Niba News”. Address:: Gospel Hill, P.O. Kearsney, Natal. NATHOO, Harry, general dealer; b. 1918 Surat, India, e. s. of late N. Bhaga; m. Wallie, d. of D. Ghela, 3 s., 2 d. Bus.: After period of pte. employment, est. own bus. 1941, trading as Quigney _ Fruiterers. Chair. E.L. Hindu Soc. 1957-58; mem. East London Indian Assoc.; hon. life vice- president Hindu Mer- chants F.C.; played Z cricket for EL. 24 Hindu C.C.; visited India 1937, 1951. Recreation: Motoring. Address: Bus., 40a Currie St., East London, Phone 5341; res., 11 Burns St., East London. re +r ad

---

## Page 11

160 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO THE B. NATALIE FAMILY NATALIE, Bhola (late), died Oct. 24, 1954 at the age of 62 years; m. Munia, d. of late Rathan of Umkomaas; 3 s., 6 d. Estd. bus, in 1930. Pub. act.: Was patron of Isipingo Ind Soc.; vice-pres. of Isipingo Dist. Ind. F.A.; patron Reunion Sri Sanathan S. Bhajan Mundal; mem. of the Sri Sanathan Dharama Sabha; trustee of the Stella Hill Ind. Sch. NATALIE, Munia, housewife; b. Umzinto, 1897; 2nd d. of late Rathan of Umkomaas; m. B. Natalie, of Reunion; 3 s.. 6 d. Address: 52 Saraben Rd., Stella Hill, Natal. NATALIE, Deonath, storekeeper; b. Reunion, 1918; e. s. of late Bhola Natalie, of Reunion; educ. at Isipingo Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Carlisle St. Govt.-aided Ind, Sch.; m. Sookia, Sth d. of late Mr. Ramnath of Isipingo; 4 s., 2 d. Was assoc. with father’s bus., now sole proprietor; now conducting bus. at 23-24 and 82 Indian Morning Market; also has branches at Rossburgh and Clairwood. Pub. act.: Sec. of the Indian Morning Market Assoc.; sec. of the Reunion Sri Sanathan S Mundal. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 52 Saraben Rd., Stella Hill, Durban; Bus., Phone 819258. NATALIE, Ramnath, headmaster; b. Reunion, 1924; 2nd s. of late Bhola Natalie; educ. at Isipingo Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Sastri College and the N.U.C.; m. e. d. of M. Domun; after leaving college entered the teaching profession. Principal of the Stella Hill Ind. Infant Sch. Pub. act.: Mem. of the Sch. Assoc. (Stella Hill); sec. of the Reunion Ind. Youth Social Club; played soccer for the Royals F.C., Isipingo. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 52 Saraben Rd., Stella Hill, Durban. NATALIE, Sewnath, student; b. at Reunion; 3rd s. of late Bhola Natalie; educ. at Isipingo Govt.-aided Ind, Sch., Sastri College and N.U.C. Undergraduate at the Natal University, B.Sc. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 52 Saraben Rd., Stella Hill, Durban. NATALIE, Mathura Rampersadh, storekeeper; b. Reunion; adopted son of late B. Natalie; educ, at Isipingo Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. Kosilia, d. of Mr. Nohar, of Mayville; 4 s., 1 d. On leaving sch. became partner of the firm, Sarnia Rd. Pro- duct Co., of which he is one of the proprietors. Address: 52 Saraben Rd., Stella Hill, Durban. Wr 4) THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 161 NAYNAH, N., cabinet maker; b. Durban 1910, s. o. N. Nagan; educ. St. Aidan’s Provincial Training College; m., 5 c. Public activities: Foundation mem. of the Sydenham Cultural Inst; ex-mem. St. John’s Ambulance; was organiser and sec. of the Sydenham Deepavali Sporting Club; ex-pres. and hon. life vice- pres. of the Sydenham Cultural Inst. Rec.; Angling. Address:; 3 Viola Rd., Sydenham, Durban. NAYNARAJ, Coopsamy Narainsamy, farmer; b. Verulam 1897, e. s. of late Nayanaraj of Mauritius; educ. at St. Aidan’s Indian School, Durban; m. Lutchmee, e. d. of late Narainsamy of Umzinto, 3 s., 2 d. On leaving school helped father to conduct the farm and later branched out in farming on own at Isipingo. Public activities: Mem. of the Tamil Vedic Society of Durban; mem. of the Shri Hariroop Vishnu Temple; takes a keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Reading. Address: P.O. Box 35, Isipingo, Natal. NAYANARAJ, Maree Moothoo, farmer; b. at Isipingo, 1917, e. s. of N. Nayanaraj of Isipingo; educ. at Clairwood Indian School; m. Devi, d. of Mr. Rajagopaul of Briardene, 1 s., 2 d. On leaving school, visited India and on return, assisted father in working the farm. Public activities: Mem. of the Tamil Vedic Society; mem. of the Isipingo F.C; mem. of the Isipingo Physical Culture Club. Rec.: Angling. Address: :Box 35, Isipingo, Natal. NAYANARAJ, Chinsamy, farmer; b. at Isipingo, 1920, s. of N. Nayanaraj of Isipingo; m. Govin- damah, y. s. of late Mr. Pillay of Umzinto, 1 s. After leaving school, was in private employment and now assoc. with father in farming activities. Recreation: Sport. Address: Box 35, Isipingo, Natal. NOOR, Mahomed Abdul Karim, demol- ishing contr.; 2nd s. of Noor Mahomed, of Kathiawar, India; b. Kathiawar; m. Zubeida, 2nd d. of Sulaiman Mitha of Bombay, India, 1 s.; educ. Hindu Tamil Instit. and Greyville Govt. School, Dur- ban. Is sole prop. of City Building De- molishers at 114 Queen St., Durban, which he est. in 1949. Public activities: Jt. hon. treas. of Mouloo and Agiarween of the Memon community; comm. mem. of Iqbal Study Group, Durban; comm. mem. of Memon Welfare Soc.; a keen worker in the interests of the Memon community; assisted with the promotion of boxing and wrestling. Address: Bus., 114a Queen St., Durban, Phone 27348; Res., Flat 7, 100 Queen St., Durban. NEHAL, Roopnarain, timber merchant and bus owner; b. Howick, Dec. 29, 1913, 3rd s. of late Nehal of Howick, formerly of Lucknow, India; educ. Howick Govt.-aided Indian School. Est. business in 1938, of which he is now sole prop. Public activities: Takes keen interest in affairs of community. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 300 Main St., Howick, Natal, Phone 56. NOORBHAI, Abdul Hamid; general mer- chant; b. India, Ran- der, 1915; s. of Rahim Noorbhai; educ. Doornfontein Ind. & Col School; Ind. & Eurafrican High Sch. & Training Centre, Bree St. Ind. Sch.; m. Rehmath Bibi, d. of Goolam Naby; 2 5. 3 d. Business: Noor- bhai & Sons, est. 1931. Public activities: Joint Sec, Talimul Mosque & Madressa Trust; and the Educ. Com.; mem. T. Col. C. Union; chairman, Muslim C.C.; vice-pres. T. Inter- Race C. Board; jt. sec. Rander Mia Bhai Soc.; ex-treas. R. Muslim Club; mem. Parents-Teachers’ Assn. I. Girls’ Sch., Vrededorp. Address: 31a Delarey St.. Vrededorp, Johannesburg. NURSOOR, David Murugan, b. Natal, 1888; m. Elfen, d. of John Bush, an early associate of Gandhi; matriculated 1920; did three years medical studies at Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons, Edin- burgh; joined Mr. Gandhi 1907; Pres. Edinburgh Ind. Assoc. 1920; Ied deputation in connection with Student Movement to Lord Lytton; was Pres. Tvl. Ind. Colonial Born Assoc.; was Pres. T.I.F.A.; exec. mem. S.A.I.C. and Indo European Joint Council; sec. T.I.C.; served 9 months imprisonenmt during Passive Resistance Movement 1908-1913; now manag- ing Durban’s International Club Add.: 341 Pine St, Durban. OMAR, Adam Moosa, sales manager; b. Cape Town, 1918, e. s. of M. Omar; educ. at Rahmania School, Cape Town; m. Fatima, e. d. of late M. Omar, 1 s., 4 d. After a period of private employment, est. own bus; now sales manager at E. M. Mitha of Goodwood. Public activities: Mem. Young Khan- amia Assoc. & Dominals Club. Rec.: Sport. Address: Bus., 177 Main Rd., Goodwood, Cape Town, Phone oa Res., 15 Muir St., Cape Town, Phone 23679,

---

## Page 12

162 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO OMAR, Hajee Fatima Essack, gen. dir, b. 1932 Cape Town, e. d. of E. Omar of Ankleswar. Surat; educ. Chapel St. Sch. and Zonne- bloem College, C.T. Bus.: Est. bus., trad- ing as Woodstock Supply Store. Public activities: Was mem. of Wisteria Tennis Club; assoc. with Muslim Women’s Activities in C.T.; visited Mecca and toured Saudi Arabia 1954. Interests: Dress- making. Address: 20 Page St., Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 51207. OMAR, Shaik, decorator & plastic painter; b. Overport, Durban, s. of Imam Shaik Osman. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in reli- gious and social matters; devotes most of his time to artistic work, pertaining to interior decoration. Rec.: Angling. Add.: 21 Llandaff Rd., May- ville, Dbn. PADAYACHEE, Janakie, housewife; b. 1908, Kimberley; d. of S. M. Padayachee; educ. Prescod Sch.; m. late C. S. Paday- achee, e. s. o. late Kandasamy Padaya- chee; 4 s., 2 d.; estd. bus. in 1918, trading as general dealer and fruiterer; now trading as Durban Fruit Merchant. Pub. act.: Was vice-pres. Indian Women’s Assn.; mem. Col. Women’s Ccl.; a popular hostess and keeps “open house”; visitors from all parts of the Union; has travelled extensively in S.A. Address: Bus., 63 Queen St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 24416; Res., 19 Bullen St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 23661. PADAYACHEE, Jack (Tommy), b. East London, 1908; s. of P. Padayachee; educ. East London; y. d. of Isden Izally, of King Wms. Town; 2 s., 2 d. Assoc. with father’s bus., later transferred to Cape Town and estd. All-India Social Club; snooker champion, played against Joe Davis; mem. of Grenadier F.C.; played in the Sam China Cup tourney in 1937, and rugby for Swaraj team in East London. Address: Bus., 98 Darling St., Cape Town, Phone 33380; Res., 73 Sir Lowry Rd., Cape Town. PADAYACHEE, Thomas, general dealer; b. Kim- berly, 1913; s. of Soopramanian Padayachee; educ. William Pescod School, Kimberley. Bus.: Trading as Charlie's Cafe. Address: 52a Main Rd., Beaconsfield, Kimberley. PADAYACHI, Nar- ansamy Poopenthren, B.A., B.Ed.; super- visor Natal Ind. Schs.; b. April 21, 1914, Dbn.; e. s. o. V. N. Padayachi; educ. York Rd. Ind. High Sch.; m. Dhanan, e. d. o. M. Naicker of Estcourt; 1 s., 2d; taught at York Rd. Sch. for several years; also at Estcourt, Sutherlands, Carlisle St. Sch.; — vice-prin. Umzinto High Sch., 1949-51; prin. of Ton- gaat Jnr. Sch., 1951- 55; principal Baitjoo Maharaj Ind. Sch. 1955-57; pro- moted Supervisor 1958. Public activities: Scout Comm. North Coast 1953-58; treas. Pietermaritzburg Boy Scouts Assn.; treas. M.D.I.F.A. 1947-48; acting treas., vice-pres. S.S.M. Temple; co-founder Divine Life Soc.; pres. H.Y.M.A.; inspector Venacular Sch.; treas. and sec. Estcourt T.C.; hon. life vice-pres, founder and sec. Alexander County Ind. F.A. 1950; was sec. of Umzinto Child Welfare and F.O.S.A.; encouraged uniforms at Natal schools; patron Good- will Club; chairman Woodlands Old Boys Club; sec. Pietermaritzburg Tech. Institute; sec. N.I.T.S., Pieter- maritzburg; sec. Natal Ind. Schools F. Assn.; sec. and treas. Royals F.C., Estcourt; was mem. Umzinto L.T.C. Recreation: Sport. Address: 533 Church St., Pietermaritzburg. PADAYACHY, Arumugam Thabdray; general dealer; b. Transvaal, May 10, 1916; s. @f Thandray Paday- achy; educ. Doornfontein Ind. afd Col. School; m. Peggy, d. of D. Vander Weetring; 4 s., 1 d. Business: New Era Dry Cleaners, est. 1947. Sporting activities: An active soccer and cricket player; repr. Transvaal in Sam China Tournament 1935-43, against All-India 1934, S.A. Indians at Cape Town 1939; found. mem. Vredons F.C. from 1933, capt. for six years, 1933-39, and won for his team the Wits & Tvl. League for six successive years; played cricket for Vredons and New THE SOUTH AFRICAN Era; delegate to Wits J.F. Assn. for Vredons and Rovers F.C.; delegate to W.W.I. Cricket Union for New Era C.C.; a found. mem. of the Ist Johannes- burg Indian Scouts. Address: 20 Davies St., Doorn- fontein, Johannesburg. PAHLINEY, Arumug- bam Peter, head- master; b. Re union, 1903; educ. Dbn.; m. G. Chellan of Port Shepstone; 1 s. 3 d.; taught at St. Aidans Boys’ Sch. in 1920; Verulam Govt. aided [Indian Sch.; Springfield Methodist Indian Sch.; Doorn- fontein and Ferreira Govt. Indian Sch., Tvl; toured Africa on bicycle; taught at Esperanza, St. Michaels; later prin. Oatlands School in 1946; started the Scout movement in Natal in 1928; Asst. Div. Commissioner, Natal South Coast; former pres. of the Ind. Teachers’ Soc., Port Shepstone; pres. of the Oatlands Angling Club. Hobby: Photography. Address: c/o Oatlands Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Fasca- dale, Natal. PAKKIRI, Dhanigachallam; b. Durban, 1936, e. s. of late Pakkiri, of Durban; educ. Tanjore Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Sastri College (J.C. 1954); training as nurse at King Edward VIII Hospital. Public activities: Riverside Social and Cultural Society. Hobbies: Out- door sports. Address: King Edward VIII Hospital; Res., 444 Riverside Rd., Durban North. PALEKAR, Abdul Kader Ismail, manufacturer (delicatessen); b. Shive, Dist. Ratnagiri, 1927; s. of Ismail Palekar; educ. in India and Cape Town; 1 s., 2 d.; took control of father’s bus. in 1950; started delicatessen bus. after gaining special permission from the meat control board, developed to one of the largest firms in the Cape Province; the only Indian engaged in this type of bus., and supplying the entire Cape Province and trading as Palmo meat manufac- turers. Public activities: Associated with all Moslem Soc. in C.T, Address: Res., 12 Signal St., Cape Town, Phone 28054; Bus., 19 Chatam Rd., Salt River, Phone 55186. Branches at 78 and 41 Rose St., Cape Town. PALSANIA, Chunilal Chhitram, b. Boohari, Bar- doli, Dist. Surat, 1911; educ. Trafalgar High School, Cape Town, Methodist Boys’ School, Baroda and Anglo-American College, Madras; on return to S.A. settled in Cape Town; started fruiterer’s bus.; also repres. of Sun Life Assurance of Canada; sworn translator in English to Gujerati language for Supreme Court of S.A. Public activities: Was organising sec. Cape Indian Congress; joint se¢. Hindu Assoc.; general sec. Mesuria Mitra Mandal; also sec. and spokesman for the commission to enquire in to the subject matter of the Separate Representative of Voters Act Validity and Amendment Bill, 1953. Address: 39 Roger St., Cape Town, P.O. Box 4624 INDIAN WHO’S WHO 163 PALSANIA, Dahyab- hai Sitharam; hair- dresser and gen. dlr.; b. Cape Town, 1930; s. o. S. R. Palsania; educ. at Trafalgar High Sch.; m. Shanti- bhen, 2nd. d. o. D. Ratanjee; 2 s., 1 d.; business was estd. by father; trading under the name of Palsania’s Hairdressing Saloon; also deals in fancy goods and _ tobacco; m. in India and re- turned in 1949. Pub. act.: Secty. of Cape Hindu C.C., 1955-57; sec. of the Cape Hindu Bhajan Mandal 1955-57; takes keen interest in Hindu religious affairs and matters affecting the Indian community in general; mem. of Everest Recreation Club. Recreation: Cricket and table tennis. Address: Bus., 66 Wale St., Cape Town, Phone 35122; Res., 173 Bree St., Cape Town, Phone 34331. PANDARAM, Subrayan; businessman; b. May 16, 1916, in Verulam, Natal; s. of Vasantharaya Panda- ran; educ. Fairbreeze Indian School; m. Anandaye, 2nd d. of Arjun, of Compensation, Natal; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Prop. Dicks Lounge, est. 1953, Stanger; served the Tongaat Sugar Co. (Cranbrook) and Stan- ger Providers for several years; caters for weddings, parties and banquets. Public activities: Singer, musi- cian and tutor in dramatics. Recreation: Fishing. Address: Bus., Phone 258, 63 Couper St., Stanger; Res., Indian Village, Stanger. PANDAY, Jaikram Ramdin, photogr.; 4th s. late Jaikram Pan- ay, of Dbn.; b. Dbn., May 7, 1918; m. only d. late Toolsie Ma- haraj of Umzinto; 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Mitchell Crescent and Higher Grade Sch., Durban; after leaving school served five-year ap- prenticeship in photo- graphy, then started own business; trading as Panday’s Studio, at Etna Lane, Dbn.; now has branches in Leopold St. and at Sydenham; takes interest in the social, religious and sporting spheres of community life and holds several official positions. Address: Bus., 62 Etna Lane, Phone 24886, Durban; Res., “Glenroy,” 243 Kennedy Rd., Phone 884250, Clare Estate, Durban, Natal.

---

