# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt2
**Total Pages:** 13

---

## Page 1

26 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO Kathree’s Radio Service Wholesale and Retail SOUND ENGINEERS Stockists of all makes of:- Radio Spares Electrical Appliances Radio Repairs effected with guarantee eee Country Orders Promptly Executed Satisfaction Assured Our only address: 23a QUEEN ST. (near Field St.) DURBAN PHONE 64976 (4 lines) THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 27 BIOGRAPHIES ABBAS, Aboobaker, trader; b. Cape Town, s. of Abba Bala of Kolaba, India; educ. India; m. Ayesha, d. of Nooruddin of Kolaba, India; 3 s. 2 d. Was in partnership with father in business; later established own business. Public act.: Mem. of Muslim Society of Cape Town; an ardent worker for the community chiefly in the sphere of religion. Address: Bus., 58 Pope St., Salt River, Cape Town, Phone 54468; Res., 84 Pope St., Salt River, Cape Town. ABBAS, Ebrahim; b. Cape Town; s. of Abbas Bala of Kolaba, India; educ. Cape Town; m. Amina, d. of late Hassim of Cape Town; 3 s., 2 d. Was assoc. with father’s business for 16 years, now in sole con- trol. Public act.: Mem. of Celtic F.C. and choir; connected with all the affairs of the Muslim com- munity. Rec.: Music. Address: 76 Pope St., Salt River, Cape Town and 2! Tennyson St., Salt River, Cape Town. ABDULLA, Ahmed Shaik, wholesale merchant; b. Furus, dist. Ratnagiri, Bombay, India, July 5, 1914; e. s. of Shaik Ahmed; educ. Cape Town. Came to S.A. with father in 1927, settled in Cape Town, estd. business trading as general dealer, 1940. In 1944 took over the wholesale firm of Atlas Trading Co. This was the first establishment of its kind in Cape Town. Public act.: Mem. of several Indian organisations. Rec.: Motoring. Res., 61 Leewen St., Phone 37385; Bus., 94 Wale St., Cape Town, Phone 24518. ABDULLA, Amod, commercial traveller; b. Durban, 1915; e. s. of Mr. Abdulla of Maritzburg; educ. at M.O.H. Schl; 1s. Was assoc. with father’s business, now a representative of several Cape Town firms. Public act.: Mem. of the Muslim Brigade, mem. of the Overport Muslim Society, patron of the Overport F.C, Rec.: Sport. Address: 62a Madressa Arc., Grey St., Durban. ABDULLA, Ebrahim, general merchant; b. Saigon, dist. Kolaba, India; 0. s. of late Abdulla Ulde; m. d. of E. N. Amod; 2 s., 4d. Came to S.A. in 1924, settled in Tvl., trading as Tip-Top Bazaars, Springs. Sec. of Mohomedan Madressa, Springs; vice-chairman, Parent Teachers’ Assn. Address: Stand 1626, Asiatic Bazaar, Springs, Tvl. ABDURAHMAN, Fakier Mohamed, merchant; b. Latvan, Ratnagiri, India, 1913; s. of Hajee A. Balla; educ. Trafalgar High Sch., C.T.; m. Noorjehan, e. d. of Hoosain Mallick; 5 s., 3 d. Was assoc. with father’s business, later appointed manager of Avalon, Palace, Athlone and Orient theatres; estd. own busi- ness in 1947, trading as Tajmahal Restaurant in Athlone. Public act.: Mem. Latvan Muslim Progress Soc., mem. Shamrocks C.C. Visited India several times. Rec.: Angling. Address: Lawerence Rd., Athlone (Peterson’s Bldg.); Res., 56 Loch Rd., Ronde- bosch, Phone 695960, Cape Town. ADAM, Ismail; _ b. Umvoti Poort, July 18, 1912; 2nd s. of Hajee Adam Mahomed; educ. Greytown and Sastri College, Durban; m. d. of I. E. Bawa of Kosamba. Became partner in the firm of his father, like other members of his family, actively interested in public affairs of the community. Address: Ahrens Rail, Natal, Box 1, Phone 1. AHMED, Abdul Majied (Mack), ship chandler; b. Baroda, India, 1913; e. s. of late Shaik Ahmed; educ, at Madressa An- juman Islam, Kathor, and P.P. High Sch., Rander and Aligarh. Came to S.A. with parents in 1921, assoc. with father’s business in 1929, took over control in 1934, trad- ing as United Fresh Fruit Supply Co., ship chandlers; held Gov- ernment contracts for supplying Naval ships of the Imperial Govt. during war, at present is con- tractor to both Union and Imperial Govts., exports fruit overseas; supplied the H.M.S. Vanguard during the Royal visit to S.A. in 1947; was a recipient of a special certificate from the H.M.S. Vanguard in recognition of his services to the Royal family and the ship’s company; also engaged in a retail business in Simonstown. Public act.: Foundation mem. of the Muslim Circle, Cape Town; general secretary of the Cape Traders’ Assn; was sec. of the Bengal Relief Fund, and Pakistan Relief Fund; was sec. of the Passive Resistance Council. Founded the Simons- town Muslim Soc. and acted as general sec.; visited India in 1946. Met late Mr. M. A. Jinnah during

---

## Page 2

28 THE SOUTH AFRICAN the visit to East Africa. Also met Pundit Nehru and the late Aga Khan. Has given an address on the S.A. Indian question in East Africa. Mem. of the National Convention of the Franchise Comm. Mem. of the delegation to see Dr. D. F. Malan and late N. C. Havenga. Mem. of the Cape School Board from 1950-55. Treas. of the W.P.I.C.U. Treas. of the W.P.LF.A. Comm. Mem. of the W.P.C.B.C. One of the organisers of the Kenya Cricket tour to Cape Town. Address: “Shrinebagh,” 54 Ravens Craig Road, Cape Town, Phone 53130, P.O. Box 475. Head Office: St. George St., Simonstown, Phone 96218. AHMED, Salejee (Dayjee), general! dlr.; s. of Salejee Asmaljee Dajee; b. in Alipur, India, in 1915; educ. Doornfontein & Jhb. Indian Schools; m. Fatima, d. of Ismail Amojee Loonat; 3 s., 3 d. Business: Trading as Salejee Asmaljee, known also as S.A. Silk Store. Public activities: Com. mem. Alipur Muslim Trust: mem. Malvern Tennis Club; City League C.C.; Vredons F.C. Add.: 39 Maddison Street. Jeppe, Johannesburg. AIDAN, Andrew, & _ headmaster; b. 18th Lg March, 190{, at Re- union, Ntl.; m. Helen Julia Anthony, d. of late S. Anthony. educ. at St. Aidan’s Provin- cial Training College. Sydenham. After graduating as a tchr. taught at: St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch.. Ladysmith Govt. Indian School, : Mitchell Crescent oute it. f. Govt. Ind. Sch., Car- SS 4 ty” f lisle St. patty Indian : aa Sch., Greyville Govt. ane Me. Ind. Sch., Braemar In- dian Sch.----Principal. 1944-1946; St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch., Vice-Principal, 1947-1952; H.Y.M.A. Govt.-Aided Indian School. Principal, 1952-1954; Verulam Ind. Primary, Principal. 1954-1956; Ladysmith Madressa Govt.-Aided Indian School. Principal, 1956. Played soccer for Collegian F.C., Durban, and for Ladysmith F.C.. Cricket: One of the founders of N.D.I.C. Union. First sec. and H.L.V.P. One of the founders of S.A.R.I-C.C., first pres. and H.L.V.P.; was vice-pres. exec. mem. and chairman of Arts & Crafts Exhibition 1938, organised by Nits; has been a mem. of the Natal Diocesan Synod tor many years; repst. Natal at the Provincial INDIAN WHO'S WHO Synod in Cape Town in 1950 and 1955; was a_ mem. of the Elective Assembly; was a mem. of the Every- man Canvas Comm., All Saints Church, Ladysmith; held several positions on the FOSA comm.; mem. of the Child Welfare Soc., Durban; now headmaster at Howick School, Natal, S.A. AKHALWAYA, Mahmood Ebrahim, b. Feb., 1919, Johannesburg; 7 s. of E. M. Akhalwaya, of Johannes- burg; educ. Govt. Ind. Sch. Jhb.; m. d. of late H. M. Akhalwaya, of Jhb.; 3 s., 1 d.; presently partner in the firm of E. M. Akhalwaya. Public activities: Vice-pres. Southern Transvaal Tennis Union; Newtown and Fordsburg Upliftment Com- mittee; manifests all round interest in progress and development of Indian sport. Rec.: Cricket, tennis and bridge; travelled India, Pakistan, Middle East and the Rhodesias. Add.: 53 Avenue Rd., Jhb. AKOODIE, Fakir Ebrahim, general dealer; s. of Ebrahim Ismail Akoodie; b. Alipur, India; educ. Springs Indian Govt. School; m. Amina, d. of Hassen Loonat; 3 s. Trading as E. I. Akoodies. Public activities: Councillor, Eastern Dist. I.F. Assn.; mem. Villas F.C.; Jack Ellis C.C.; sec. Springs Muslim Assn.; mem. Nondescript Tennis Club. Visited India 194]. Addzess: Stand 1602, Springs Location, Baker- ton, Transvaal. ALLEE, Haj Ma- homed Arbee, general merchant; b. Kilos Kathiawar, India, 1896; s. of Haj. A. Amod; 4 s, 4 d. Arrived in S.A. 1909, settled in Tongaat. Bus.: Became partner in father’s bus, 1921. Est. own bus. 1934. Jrading as Arbee Amod & Sons. Public activities: Trustee and chairman Anjuman Islam, Tongaat (Mos- que and Madressa); mem. Tongaat Town Board; Trustee for Homes for aged and poor at Tongaat; mem. Club Harmony; patron Tongaat Ind. Tennis Club. Add.: Bus., Box 14, Phone 13, Tongaat; Res., Main St., Tongaat, Phone Extn. ALLIE, Bagas, merchant; b. Vhaloo, Broach, 1890; m. 1 s., 2 d.: settled in Cape Town on arrival from India; estd. bus. in fruit trade; in 1912 moved to Uithage and conducted business till 1926; returned to Cape Town, trading as Union Fruit Supply Co.; pres. Muslim Assoc. 1913 to 1926 at Uithage; sec. Cape British Ind. Council, affiliated to S.A.I.C.; repr. Uitenhage at several S.A.I.C. conferences; pres. Rose- line Rugby F.C.; was treas. A.P.O. for Uitenhage branch; founder of Arabic Sch. and Mosque, Uiten- hage; trustee Muslim Assoc., Uitenhage; one of foun- ders of Indian Moslem Sch. and Moslem Kanumyia Mosque; sec. Kanumyia Moslem League’ and takes keen interest in Indian affairs. Add.: 29 Rutger St., Cape Town, Phone 31642. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO Se The Ramgulam Angath Family | sii ANGATH, Ramgulam, B.A., industrialist; b. Durban, Oct. 12, 1915; 4th s. of late Ramgulam of Durban, formerly of Colonelganj, U.P., India; m. Srimuth, 4th d. of B. Mahabeer; 1 d. (Gita Angath, b. May 6, 1952); educ. St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham; Ind. Tech. Inst.; Natal University College; passed T4 in 1934, obtained B.A. degree in 1947 with distinction in bookkeeping; was senior asst. teacher at St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch. 1933/1943; started furniture and joinery business in 1939; prop. of Natal Furniture Products, 62 Balfour Rd., Jacobs, Natal. Pub, act.: Was sec. Sydenham Ind. Ratepayers’ Assn.; pres. Natal Ind. Congress (Sydenham/Overport Branch); one of the founders of Natal Ind. Teachers’ Union; mem. Natal Ind. Teachers’ Soc.; sec. Durban and Dist. Ind. Sch. Football Assoc.; patron Jacobs United F.C.; mem. Durban International Film Soc.; attended National Con- ference of the Furniture Manufacturing Industry at Cape Town in 1946; attended S.A. Ind. Congress Confer- ence at Cape Town in 1946; mem. Furniture Club of America; patron Jacobs Educational Soc. In 1953, accompanied by wife, visited India, Middle East, Europe and U.K., U.K. for Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. 1957-58, accompanied by wife and daughter, toured Central African Territories, India, Burma, Hong Kong, Japan, Honolulu, Canada, United States, Philippines, Ghana, United Kingdom and the Continent of Europe; met world personalities General J. C. Smuts, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, Dr. Rajudra Prasad, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan; visiting several large furniture factories in London, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, New York and Brussels. Specialises in distinctive designs and contemporary and period furniture. Hobbies: Motor- ing. Address: 62 Balfour Rd., Jacobs, Durban, Natal, Phone 87642, Tel. Add.: “Angram”. 62 Balfour Rd., Jacobs, Durban. Phone 87642. Tel. Add. ‘Angram’.

---

## Page 3

30 THE SOUTH AFRICAN ALLIE, Hoosen, b. Ratnagiri, Bombay, India; e. s. of A. Baloo; educ. India; m., 3 s., 1 d. Came to South Africa in 1929 and estd. grocery business in Wynberg and later in Sir Lowry Rd.; now trading at Elsies River under name of H. A. Trading Store; visited India several times; mem. of Serajul Islam Educ. League and Muslim Educ. Soc.; takes keen interest in Muslim affairs. Address: Bus., 510 Klip- fontein Road, Phone 986175; Res., 369 Klipfontein Road, Cape Town. ALLIE, Ismail, merchant; b. Bulawayo, S. Rhodesia, 1912; e. s. of Mahomed Allie; educ. Cape Town; m. 2 s..2 d. Arrived in S.A. 1914; estd. own bus. trading as Pakistan & Public Stores; visited India 1953. Pub- lic activities: Mem. of the Muslim Welfare Soc.; active worker in the affairs of the Indian community. Address: cnr. of Flinders & Acre Road, Wasco, Cape Town. Phone 988386. ALLY, Khader Abdul, company director; b. Durban, Feb. 12, 1924; y. s. of late Mr. Ally Mahomed, of Durban; m. d. of M. Mahomed, of Durban; 1 s.; educ. Clairwood Senior Boys’ Sch. and Sastri College, Durban; estd. bakery and confectionery business in 1930; Allison’s Clothing Manufacturers (1950); Clairwood Trading Co., and is director of these companies. Address: 133 Sirdar Road, Phone 81357. Clairwood, Natal. AMEER, Goolam Rassoo}, businessman; b. Lady- smith, 1912; s. of Ameer Rehim; m. Rassool Bibi, d. of Karrim Vazeer, of Ennersdale; 3 s., 4 d.; educ. Ladysmith Govt. Ind. Sch.; was connected in bus. with A. K. Ameer Bros. since 1932; estd. own bus. in 1949 at Newcastle. Public activities: Chairman Newcastle Moslem Community since 1955; treas. of the Sch. Building Fund of the Newcastle Indian Primary Sch. and was responsible for the collection of money for the building; patron Ozones LF.C. and C.C.; keenly interested in sports. Address: 36-38 Allen St., Newcastle, P.O. Box 109. AMLA, Ismail Ebra- him, butcher; e. s. of Ebrahim Amla,_ of Umzinto; b. Umzinto. June 10, 1920; m. Amina, d.o. E. Hansa. of Durban; 1 s.. 4 d. Assumed control of butchery (est. 1930 & only Ind. butchery in Port Shepstone) in 1945, trading as Um- Jaas Butchery. In- terested in community life. Rec.: Cricket. angling. Add.: Bus.. 32 Reynolds St., P.O. Box 69, Phone 302. Port Shepstone; Res., 21 Aiken St., Phone 352, Port Shepstone, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO AMIN, Ishwarbhai, Attorney-at-Law; an outstanding student at Sastri College; was associated with firm of J. W. Godfrey; Ist Speaker of Parliamentary Debating Society; prominent mem. Table Tennis Union. Add.: Lakhani Chmbrs., Saville St., Durban. AMRA, Goolam Hoo- sen Ismail; dealer in motor spares; b. Jan. 16, 1916, La Mercy, Natal; e.s. of Ismail Moosa Amra; educ. Umhloti Ind. School. Verulam, and Mitchell] Crescent Ind. School, Durban; m. e.d. of Ismail Goolam Moola; 2 s. 4 d. Business: Co-partner in City Motor Spares, dealing in motor spares and j : roo accessories, com- | ‘ menced six years ago. Public activities: Mem. Ottoman C.CS.C. Recreation: Cricket. Address: Bus., 38-40 Alice St., Durban; Res.. 259 Winchester Drive, Reservoir Hills, Durban. AMTAY, Abdul Kader, b. Harkol, Kolaba, Bombay, India, 1919; e. s. of late N. Amtay; educ. India; m. Karoon Nissa. d. of J. Marinus; 1 s., 1 d.; was associated with father’s bus.; now foreman at Palmo meat manufacturers. Public activities: Mem. Kokaney Assn. Trust of Elsies River, Muslim Educ. Soc.; official of several sporting clubs. Address: Bus., 19 Chatam Road, Cape Town, Phone 55186; Res., 353 Klipfontein Road, Elsies River, Cape Town. ANAND, Bridgemohan, farmer; b. Natal, 1905; s. of Anand; 8 s., 9 d.; bus.: Farmer for 25 years, also market agent; property owner. Public activities: Treas. Raisethorpe Sanathan Dharam Sabha; founder Rama- krishna Mundal, Raisethorpe; mem. Baijoo Maharaj Sch., Raisethorpe, Recreation: Gardening. Address: 450 Church Street, Pietermaritzburg. ANDHEE, Seucha- ran, vice-prin. Kas- turba Gandhi G.-A. Ind. Sch.; b. Verulam, December 25, 1922; s. of late Andhee Shah; educ. Sastri College, Teachers Training Coll., Dbn.; m. 3 s., 1 d. Public activities: | Formerly Principal Broadmoor Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch., Wartburg 1949-56; member Verulam Deepavali Cheer Committee. Address: 1 Starr St., Verulam, Natal. > THE SOUTH AFRICAN APPALRAJU, Moonsamy, Company Director; b. at Port Shepstone, 1905; e. s. of V. Appalraju; educ. at Port Shepstone; m. d. of late Brumiah, of Port Shepstone; 4 s., 3 d.; associated with the firm of V. Appalraju & Son; also conducts own business, trading under the style of M,. A. Raiu & Sons. Pub. act.: Sec. of the Umzim- kalu Mill Group Board since its in- ception. Rec.: Gardening. Add.: Res., Albertsville, Port Shepstone, Phone 009; P.O. Box 119. APPALRAJU, Rajagopaul, C.O.. Mer- chant; b. Port Shepstone, 1921; 3rd s. of V. Appalraju; educ. at Port Shepstone; m. d. of K. Naidoo, of Durban; 2 s., ] d.: Managing Direc- tor of Tradewell Supply Store, 41 Wooly Street, Port Shepstone, Reprs. of Insurance Company. Pub. act.: Pres. of Port Shepstone Child Welfare and Benevolent Societies; Pres. of the Umzimkulu Group Mill Board; Joint Sec. of the Port Shepstone Ind. Rate- payers Assn.; Comm, Mem. of Cricket Union and Footkall Assn. of Port Shepstone; founded the Parents Assn. of Port Shepstone; keenly interested Indian education, Add.: Bus., Caxton Buildings, 41 Wooly St.. Port Shep- stone, Phone 206. Res., 46 Price St., Port Shepstone. Phone 206. APPALRAJU, Vagiraju, retired busi- nessman; b. Visagapatnam, Andhra State, India, 1872; 4th s. of late V. Sapuraju; 5 s., 4 d. Arrived in South Africa 1895, settled in Port Shep- stone; commenced General Dealers business and Cane Farming in 1923; estd. the firm of Appalraju & Son; retired in 1949. Pub. act.: Trustee of Port Shepstone Hindu Educational Soc.; Trustee of the Andrah Maha Sabha of South Africa; has visited India on several occasions. Add.: Box 119, Port Shepstone, Phone 009. APPALRAJU, Vartharaju, Company Director; b. Port Shepstone, 1925; s. of V. Appalraju; educ. Port Shep- stone; m. d. of D. V. Naidoo, of Durban; 2 s., 2 d.; Director of V. Appalraju and Son. Pub. act.: Chair- man of Louisiana Ind. Sch. Board; Comm. Mem. of Parent Assn.; en- gaged in Cane Farming. Add.: Bus., Louisiana, Port Shepstone, P.O. Box 4: Res., Louisiana, Port Shepstone, Phone 2612. INDIAN WHO'S. WHO THE V. APPALRAJU FAMILY APPALRAJU, Seeramulu, Merchant; b. Port Shepstone, 1919; educ, at Port Shepstone; m. d. of S. R. Naidoo, of North Shepstone: 4 s., 2 d.; Director of V. Appalraju & Son and subse- quenuy partner in Tradewell Supply Store. Rec.: Snort. Add.: P.O. Box 119, Port Shepstone. APPALRAJU, Ramchandra, Company Director; b. Port Shepstone, 1927; 5th s. of V. Appalraju, of Port Shepstone; educ. Port Shepstone Govt. Sch.; m. d. of S. R. Naidoo, of Durban; 1 s., 2 d.; Director of V. Appalraju & Son. Pub. act.: Vice-Pres. Port Shepstone C. U. Treas. F.O.S.A., Port Shepstone Branch; Sec. Louisiana Ind. Sch. Assn.; keenly interested in sport. Add.: Bus., Louisiana, Port Shepstone. Phone 2612; Res., Louisiana, Port Shepstone.

---

## Page 4

32 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO APPADOO, _ Iyappa, farmer; b. 1903, Coed- more, Natal; educ. Durban Indian Higher Grade School; m. 7 c. Associated with all social welfare activi- ties in the district. Add.: Box 2343, Dbn. APPAVOO, Dr. Nadarasen Vadivalloo, L.R.C.P., L.R.CS., Edin. & Glas.; b. De Aar, 1915; y. s. of late V. Appavoo; educ. Lovedale, C.T. University and Edinburgh; proceeded to Edinburgh in 1937; returned to S.A. 1942; set up practice in Port Eliza- beth; now resident at East London; mem. Indian Assoc., E.L.; mem. Ind. Assoc., Edinburgh. Address: Res., 23 Sprigg St., Cambridge, East London, Phone 87185; Surgery, 11 Amalinda Road, Phone 2900. ARIEFF, Badrodin, general dealer; b, in Cape Town; s. of M. Arieff; educ. in Cape Town; 5 s., 3 d.; estd. own bus. at Strand after leaving school; later opened bus. at Mowbry and Athlone, trading as Union Fruiterers; three sons conducting mineral water factory, trading under the name of Stork Beverages. Public activities: Mem. Cape Rander Welfare Assn.; mem. of James Town Mosque; comm. mem. Muir Street Moslem Ind. Sch.; keenly interested in religious work. Address: Beverly Street, Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 62614; Res.. Dobson Road, Athlone, Cape T. AUGUSTINE, Clarence, Chev.; b. Pmburg. 1915; y. s. of David Augustine; educ. St. Anthony’s Sch.; m. Lima, d. of W. Phyllis, of Somer- set East; 1s 7 di. Was engaged in shoe trade for 5 years, now employed by S.A. Railways; served in army 1941-47; was mem. Rising Stars F.c.; foundation mem. Hotel Em- ployers F.A., H.L.V.P. Hotel Employers F.A. nominee to Federation Board; was mem. Milo Health and Strength League. P.E. Recreation: Bridge. Address: 3 Nelson Lane. Port Elizabeth. ARBEE, Aboobaker, wholesale merchant; b. India, 1912; keenly interested in social welfare work. Rec.: Snooker and swimming. Address: Prince Edward Street, Durban. AUGUSTINE, Joseph, storekeeper; b. Estcourt; s. of Thomas Augustine; m. Marie Joseph, d. of P. M. Joseph, of Maritzburg; 3 s.; educ. Estcourt and Ladysmith Govt. Indian School; originally book- keeper; later estd. the firm of Augustine Bros. at Estcourt in 1938. Public activities: Hon. life vice- pres. Weenen County I.F.A.; hon. life vice-pres. Estcourt Lawn Tennis Club; clr. Natal I.F.A.; foun- dation mem. Weenen County I.F.A. and Tennis Club; played cricket for Railway and Estcourt Ind. Cricket Clubs; partly responsible for the Indian ward at the Estcourt Sanatorium; takes keen interest in educ., sports. Recreation: Tennis, angling. Address: P.O. Box 47, Rensburg Drift, Estcourt, Natal. BACHOO, Sooknu- nan, fresh produce dealer; b. Nov. 15, 1925, in Durban, Natal; 2nd s. of Sook- nunan; educ. St. Aid- an’s Boys’ School, Sydenham; m. Koo- silla, 6th d. of Bedesi, of Tongaat; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Fresh pro- duce dealer, est. 1942; at present doing who. and retail in fruit and vegetables. Prop. Ex- celsior Produce Co.. conducting gen. dlir., aer. Water. tea room and restaurant. Public activities: Com. mem. Candella Estate Hindu San- gathan. Interested in Avalon Sporting Club. Address: Bus., Phone 22684, 31 Etna Lane, Durban; Res., 163 Forty-Fifth Avenue, Sherwood, Durban. BADSHEER, Mo- hamed (Moosa), sales- man; b. 1932, Dbn.; s.o. Ismail Abrahams; educ. St. Michaels Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch. Public activities: Nt. featherweight cham- pion 1957, Natal Ban- tam weight _ lifting champ., 1954; runner- up in featherweight division, Dbn. cham- pionship 1955. Runner-up for Health and Strength com- petition in weight lifting and physique. 1954. Runner-up for Mr. South Coast Contest, 1955-56; also won a most muscles man award. Recreation: Music, swimming. Address: 356 South Coast Road, Rossburgh, Durban. ae THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 33 The Jivanji B. Arya Family © ARYA, Jivanji Bhagabhai, general dealer and tailor; b. Sisodra, Surat, India, 1897; s. of B. Naranbhai; educ. in India; came to S.A. in 1907. Estd. a general dealer’s business in Potchefstroom and a tailoring firm at Krugers- dorp, 1923. Pub. act.: Keen Arya Samajist and student of Hindu Scriptures; former exec. mem. of the Transvaal Indian Tailoring Employers’ Association; former sec. of the Hindu Dharma Sabha, Krugersdorp; a mem. of the Tvl. 66-3603. ARYA, Harishchandra Jivanji, teacher; b. Potchefstroom, Tvl., 1921; s. of J. B. Arya; educ. Gurukula Vidyamandir, Supa, Dist. Surat, India; m. Sumitradevi, d. of C. V. Gandevia, Bombay; | s. Bus.: Estd. printing works, trading under the style of “Nutan” Printing Works. Pub. act.: Taught at Shree Gandhi Bharat Vidyalaya, Johannesburg, later was assoc. with late Pundit Sudhirkumar Vidyalankar at Shree Bharat Sharda Mandir until 1954; estd. Hindi Vidya Mandir, Johannesburg, in 1948, which is affiliated to the Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti Hindinagar-Warda, and the Hindi Shiksha Sangh of S.A.; classes are conducted in Sanscrit and Gita, the curriculum being prescribed by the Swadhyaya Mandal Ananadashram, India; joint sec. of the Tvl. Seva Samaj; former sec. Tvl. Gujarati Shikshak Sangh and Shree Yuvak Mandal Maroli Bazaar, India; priest for the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, S.A.; vice-pres. Hindi Shiksha Sangh, S.A.; founder and principal of Hindi Vidyamandir, Johannesburg. The pupils of his school have performed numerous concerts in aid of charity. Rec.: Music. Address: P.O. Box 8049, Johannesburg, Phone 33-6835, Tel. Add.: “Bharati,” Johannesburg; Bus., 165 Main Rd., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 34-1653, Tel. Add.: “Nutan”, Johannesburg. : Hindu Seva Samaj. Address: 28 Market St., Krugersdorp, Tvl., S.A., Phone KAMALADEVI, Vidya-Vibhushiti; b. Potchefstroom, July 24, 1922; d. of J. B. Arya; educ. at Baroda, Utter Pradesh; received the degrees of Vidya-Vibhushita and Visharada (U.P.); m. Thakordas, e. s. of A. Makanji, Durban; 3 d.; taught in India before settling in S.A.; contributes articles to Hindi and Gujarati magazines. Rec.: Gujarati literature and music. Address: 19 Sarojini Ave., Riverside, Durban North, P.O. Box 2575, Durban. VIDYALANKAR, Pandit Arun Kumar, teacher; b. at Krugersdorp, 1923; s. of J. B. Arya; educ. at Delhi and Gurukula University, Hardwar, Utter Pradesh; received degree, Vidyalankar in 1950; capped by Dr. Rajendraprasad, President of India; m. Chanchalben, d. of B. L. Bodalia, of Nairobi; 1| s.; taught in India before returning to S.A.; joined the Shree Gandhi Bharat Vidyalala and Hindi Vidyamandir in Johannesburg. Pub. act.: Former pres. of the Hindu Welfare Soc.; mem. of the Tvl. Gujarati Shikshak Sangh; priest of the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, S.A.; arrested in New Delhi and courted im- prisonment during India’s struggle for Independence; has travelled extensively in India; has also estd. a printing press at 165 Main Rd., Fordsburg, Johan- nesburg. Rec.: Music.

---

## Page 5

34 THE SOUTH AFRICAN BAIJNATH, Yadh Ruthan Harilal, wholesale mer- chant; 2nd s. of K. Baijnath, of Durban; b. Durban, October 22, 1925; m. e. d. of D. Doorgha, of Clair- wood; educ. A.Y.S., Mayville, and Sastri College, Durban; after leaving college joined his father in bus., trading as K. Baijnath (Pty.), Ltd., wholesale merchants and direct importers, and became managing director after father’s death. Public activities: Pres. Cato Manor Parents’ and Teachers’ Assn.; chairman A.Y.S. Platoon Sch. Board; trustee Wiggins United Social Club; mem, Cato Manor Cemetery and Crematorium Management Board; permanent dele- gate of Cato Manor Ratepayers’ Assn. on the Com- bined Ratepayers’ Assn.; was chairman A.Y.S. Sch. Old Boys’ Club. Recreation: Tennis, fishing. Address: Bus., 170 Victoria Street, Phone 25860, Durban; Res.. 256 Wiggins Road, Phone 888849, Mayville, Durban. BAIJOO, Thulsie, farmer and wood and coal merchant; b. 1902, Natal; m. Ish- wadevi, y. d. of late Mr. & Mrs. Bitshoo: 5s. 2 d. Est. wattle contracting bus. in 1927, expanded the bus. and now con- ducting wattle and coal sales; also a wattle contractor: farms in the dist. and has large dairy herd. Public activities: Pres. Arya Samaj from 1940; chair. Deepa- vali Cheer Soc. since 1953; mem. of F.O.S.A.; patron Indian Child Wel- fare; mem. Arya Pritinidhi Sabha, of Durban; mem. Aryan Benevolent Soc., Pietermaritzburg; estd. English School at Raisethorpe; later with assistance from Mr. Maharaj, of Raisethorpe, expanded school buildings; now known as Baijoo-Maharaj School; played cricket and soccer in younger days for Royals; visited India, Pakistan and United Kingdom, 1958: a generous donor to afl public causes. Address: 571 Berg Street, Pietermaritzburg. BAIJOO, Bitshoo Ishwadevi, b. 1918. Durban; y. d. of late Mr. & Mrs. Bitshoo. of Durban; m. T. Baijoo, of Pmburg.; educ. St. Aidens Ind. Girls H.S., Dbn.; 5 s.. 2 d. Public activities: Mem. Arya Samaj. Patron Plessislaer Stree Samaj; keen on religious and social work and of charit- able disposition; has travelled extensively in India. Rec.: Garden- ing. Add.: 571 Berg St., Pmburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO BANSDA, Damodar Narotam, Journalist; b. Port Elizabeth, May 25, 1919; s. of N. F. Bansda, of P.E.; educ P.E.; | s., 2 d. Repre- sents “The Leader” in C.T. Public activities: Foundation mem. Aryan Sports Club, P.E.,1935;, sec. EP C.U. 1940-43; hon. treas. W.P.1.C.U. 1948- 49; hon. sec. W.P.1.C.U_ 1949-51; sec.S.A.LC.U, 1951-53; hon. — sec. W.P.C. Federation; asst. sec. W.P.C. Brd. of Control; H.L.V.P.- W.P.I. C.U.; national selector S.A.I-C.U. 1952-57; delegate for W.P.L.C.U. 1952-57 to S.A.LC.U.; helped to organise the Kenya cricket tour 1956; selector, W.P.LC.U. 1949-56; also connected with Football Assn. in the Western Province; correspondent to Cape Times on Non-European cricket; co-editor of the S.A. Non-European Cricket Almanack. Address: 37 Pine Road, Woodstock, Cape Town. P.O. Box 4643, Phone 51908. eee eee BARMANIA, Mahomed Dawood, M.A. (Economics, Calcutta); b. Pietermaritzburg, 1895; m. Ayesha Bibi, 3rd d. of late A. M. Waid, formerly of Mauritius; educ. City College, Calcutta and University of Calcutta; after graduation returned to South Africa; entered father’s firm of general dealers at Umzim- kulu; retired from business and was engaged in farming; at present conducting an agency office in Cape Town. Public activities: Executive member of the S.A.LC.: reprs. Cape Province at many sessions of the S.A.I.C. conferences; secretary S.A.I.C. 1945. Hobby: Wireless and literature. Address: 13 Nile Street, Cape Town, Phone 28893. BARNABAS, Bernard, schoolmaster; educ. St. Aidan’s Prov. Training College; b. 1896, Public activities: Foundation member N.I.T.S., also ex-vice-president, treas. and exec. mem. of same; principal Lidgetton Govt.-Aided Ind. Sch, 1919; principal Mayville Govt.- Aided Ind. School 1920-56; officially retired but now in service as Asst. Teacher at Centenary Road Govt.- Aided Ind. Sch.; served in World War I as Corporal, World War II as Senior Warden in the C.P.S.: chair- man and founder of F.O.S.A. Care Comm. (Mayville); pres. Mayville Ratepayers’ Assoc.; ex-pres. of Dbn. Ind. Combined Ratepayers’ Assoc.; father donated ground for Christian burials at Sydenham and also the first school site in this area. Address: 29 Shamrock Ave., Mayville, Durban. > The Bakharia Family of Johannesburg © THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO BAKHARIA, Suleman Ahmed (late), wholesale merchant; b. India, 1882; e. s. of Mr. Bakharia, Lachpur, Surat, India; educ. Private; 3 s.. 3 d. Was founder of firm of Bakharia Mia & Co., and other business organisations. Pub. act.: Was trus. Rustenburg Mosque and Mohammedan congregation; prime mover in establishing Lachpur Madressa; collected sub- stantial funds for establishment of its properties in S.A, and India; was host to Mrs. Sarojini Naidu during her visit to the Transvaal; served term of imprisonment during Boer War for assisting Boers and was friend of President Paul Kruger. Of charitable disposition. Died March, 1944. BAKHARIA, Yusuf, printer; b. Jan. 1, 1920; 2nd so of late S. A. Bakharia of Johannesburg; educ. Bree St. Govt. Ind. Sch., Johannesburg; m. d. of Mohamed Mehtar of Taaibosch Spruit; 1s, 3 d. Is partner in the firm of Royal Printers. Pub. act.: Keenly interested in all forms of sport and general welfare of the Indian community. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 12 Wolhuter St., Westgate, Johannesburg, P.O. Box 13, Fordsburg, Phone 335667. BAKHARIA, Ahmed Suleman, printer; b. July 25, 1909; Lachpur, Surat, India; e. s. of late S. A. Bakharia of Johannesburg; educ. Aligarh University, India; m. d. of late Mahmood Bakharia, of Rustenburg, Transvaal. Estd. Royal Printers and now in partnership with two brothers; one of the leading printers in the Transvaal. Pub. act.: Trust. Rustenburg Mohammedan community; was capt. of C.C. (Aligarh University); awarded gold medal for dramatics at university; all-round sportsman. Brother, Shah Mohamed, now studying medi- cine in England; two sisters are qualified nurses in London. Urdu scholar and speaks five languages fluently.

---

## Page 6

36 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO BALLARAM, _ Sere- path; 3rd s. of late Shah B. Ballaram; b. Bellair, Jan. 12, 1891; educ, Durban Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch. Joined the firm of B. Gundelfinger. In 1910 accompanied father to India, where super- a vised family business. : Was well known in . 2 business circles of tha - Bhind in Gwalior State. Was a mem. of the Baporian Com- mittee; m. at Fate- phur District, Etah, United Province of India, to daughter of Shah Lalla Dahyaram Zimadar; 5 d., 2s. Sailed for South Africa 1927 and joined the firm of Ballaram & Sons. Address: P.O. Box 1}, Phone 9-1417, Hillary, Natal. THE BALLARAM FAMILY & BALLARAM, W oother persadram; 4th son of the late Shah B. Ballaram; b. Hillary, Sept. 1, 1897; educ. Depot Rd. Govt, Ind. Sch. and Carlisle St. Govt. Ind. Sch. Joined father’s bus. 1918; later estd. car- tage bus. in 1929; estd. the Umhlatuzana Bus Services. On the death of J. Ballaram in 1930 took his brother’s post as com- mercial traveller for Natal Indian business. Imported five images from India and presented them to the Shri Luxmin- arayan Temple of Clairwood, Natal, 1931. Chair- man, N.J.C. Seaview branch 1938 (now N.I. Assn.); m. d. of Berchan Shah, of Edendale; 2 s., 6 d. Address: P.O. Box 1, Phone 9-1421, Hiilary, Dur- ban, Tel. Add., “Math Bhawan”. BALLARAM, Shah Bhojahram (late); b. Nunata, Gwaliar State, India; came to Natal 1876; was employed by Captain Dering Stainbank at Coedmore, Bellair; accompanied him in service during the Zulu Campaigns 1879; estd. bus. at Bellair 1885. For short periods was resident in O.F.S. and Kimberley. Left for India 1910, estd. bus. at Bhind, Gwaliar, India. Died 1915 at Baberi, India. BALLARAM, A.; e. s. of S. B. Ballaram; b. Bellair, April 13, 1886; m. d. S. Jugroopram, of Durban, April 17, 1908; educ. High Grade Ind. Sch., Durban. Joined firm of William Watson as shipping clerk; took charge of family business at Hillary, 1910. Pub. act.: Laid founda- tion stone of Malvern Govt.-aided Sch. and Chatsworth Govt.-aided Sch., also presented the furniture for these schools. Died at Hillary, June 15, 1939. ba we A» BALLARAM, Mrs. B., wife of S. B. Bajlaram; b. Jan. 6, 1885; 4.s., 5 d. BALLARAM, Junepath; 2nd s. B. Ballaram: b. Bellair, June 23, 1888; educ. Durban High Grade Govt. Ind. Sch.; m d. of Nepaulsing, April 17, 1908; 1 d. Joined firm Durban Oil & Soap Co., Ltd., later known as B. Gundelfinger; later was employed by S.A. Oil & Fat Industries, Ltd. (25 Ks years). One of the first Indians to ' own a motor car. Was Official of Depot Rd. Hindu Temple. Died Dur- ban, March 9, 1930. THE SOUTH AFRICAN BASSUDEY, Ramija- than, businessman; b. Feb. 2, 1918, Veru- lam, Natal; 3rd s. of Ramjathan, of Clair- wood; educ. Depot Road Indian School, Durban; m.; 2 s., 1 d. Business: Prop. Bassgo Produce Co., est. 1945. Govt. contractor and shipping agent and suppliers to leading hotels in Durban. Public activities: Inter- ested in all progressive community move- ments. Add.: Bus., 117 Warwick Ave., Phone 21859, Durban; Res., 64 Wills Road, Phone 61437, Durban. BAWA, Abbas Kader, commercial traveller; 6. Ratnagiri, Bombay, India, 1934; s. of K. Bawa; educ. India; m. Ayesha, d. of Shaik Allie, of Cape Town; after leaving school was in private employ- ment. Public activities: Mem. Jahangir C.C.; assoc. with cultural and religious bodies in Cape Town. Recreation: Sports. Address: Lawrence Rd., Athlone, Cape Town. BAWA, Abdurahman, merchant; b. Latvan, Dist. Ratnagiri, April 17, 1901; e. s. of late M. H. Balla; educ. Latvan and Cape Town; m. Fatima, d. of Goolam Bawa; 2 s., 2 d. Came to South Africa in 1916, settled in Cape Town; in 1927 took over father’s business, trading as A. Bawa. Public act.: Permanent mem. of Habibiya Kockney Society; mem. of Latvan Dabot Educ. Soc.; visited India 1953; takes keen interest in the affairs of Muslim com- munity. Recreation: Gardening, social work. Address: Bus., 232 Long St., Cape Town, Phone 23289; Res., 242 Buitengracht St., Cape Town. BAWA, Ebrahim Ah- med, b. Kawai Dist., Ratnagiri, Feb. 11, 1915; m. Habeeba; I s., Noormahomed; educ. Livingstone H. Sch., Claremont. Cape; Dawars Commercial College, Bombay; holds commercial diplomas of the In- dian Chmbr. of Com- merce and Cambridge University; took over father’s business in 1937-38. Public activi- ties: chairman Indian Traders Assoc.; exec. mem. Indian Comm. on Group Areas; vice-chair. S.A. Kokanie Moslem League; chair. Young Kokanie Moslem Soc.; sec. Rahmania Anglo Urdu Sch.; exec. mem. Livingstone B INDIAN WHO’S WHO 37 High Sch. Comm.; and mem. of various other Indian and non-European political and social organisations; was responsible for the building of the Rahmania Anglo-Urdu Sch. at Wynberg, Cape. Address: 69 Ravenscraig Road, Woodstock Cape Town. BAWA, Ibrahim Muhammad, B.A., Wits., Bar.-at- Law, London. Public activities: Was prominent in Student Activities; formerly practised in Karachi; prominent mem. Natal Muslim Council; also takes an active interest in Politics; now practising at West End House, Grey St., Durban. BECHOO Gungaper- sadh, headmaster; b. Stanger, 1904; m. 2nd d. of R. Lugunberthy, of Durban; 4 s., 6 d.; commenced as pupil teacher in 1917, joined Govt. service in 1921, at Stanger Ind. Sch., promoted as head- master of Mount Edgecombe Govt.-A. Ind. Sch. in 1937, transferred to Grey- town in 1931, pro- moted to Port Shep- stone Sch. in 1945; assumed principalship of Clairwood Indian Junior Sch. and now known as the Durban South Primary Sch. in 1950. Public activities: Was hon. sec. and treas. of Lower Tugela Dist. Hindu V.D.S.; chairman of the N.I.T.S. Port Shepstone and Clair- wood branches; chairman of the South Coast District Educational Board; played soccer, cricket and tennis; captained the first representative North Coast soccer team against Durban; captained the Stanger Tennis Club in Alfred David Shield matches. Address: 78 Horsham Road, Clairwood, Durban. BHAGA, Premabhai, b. Bulsar, Surat, In- dia; e. s. of Bhagar Kesur; educ. Bulsar, India; m. Jasoodab- hen, d. of F. Bhana, of Bulsar, India; 3 s., 1 d. Came to S.A. in 1911, and settled in Cape Town. Estd. bus. trading as Bhaga Shoe Stores and P. Bhaga & Sons, in Main Rd., Maitland. Public activities: Was vice- pres., United Hindu Association; founder & chair. of Kshatria Mithra Mundal; vice- chairman of Moochi Maha Sabha; takes an interest in all Indian affairs. Recreation: Reading. Address: 103 Main Road, Maitland, Cape Town, Phone 54547.

---

## Page 7

38 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO BEHARI, Dhawsuran Awath, B.Sc. (S.A.), M.B., Ch.B. (Rand); b. Durban, 1924; practising in Durban. Address: 289 Quarry Road, Springfield, Durban. BHAGAT, Ramiji Pragji, gen. merchant; b. Surat, India, Feb. 5, 1893; s. of late P. Bhagat, of India; educ. India; m. Gaga- ben; 2 s.. 1 d.; est. bus. in 1932; trading as Bhagat Bros. (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities: Member of Patidar Society and Hindu Seva Samaj; interested in all activities con- cerned with welfare of Indian community. Arrived from India in 1905. Address: Bus., 14 Kort St, Jhb., Phone 335920, Box 5390; Res., 7 Orient House, corner Becker and Commissioner Streets, Johannesburg. Ww BHANA, Essop Suliman, insurance consultant; b. South Africa, 1928; s. of Suliman Ebrahim Bhana; educ. High School. Bus.: Estd. bus. 1947; well known in the insurance field in the Transvaal; principal In- dian representative of one of the oldest English insurance companies; also partner of wholesale grocery bus.; sec. of Social Welfare Soc. Recreation: Tennis. Address: P.O. Box 7987, Johannesburg. BHANABHAI, Val- jeebhai, general dlr.; b. Delvada, District Surat, India, in 1912; s. of Bhanabhai Hira; educ. in India; m. Mithiben, d. of Pan- chiabhai Kola; 4 s., 3 d. Business: Bhana Hira & Son. Member of Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj. Address: 417 8th Street. Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. / , BHATT, Jayantilal G., medical practitioner; b. 1917; educ. University of Bombay and Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons (Edin.); interested in social welfare work. Hobby: Photography. Address: Box 72, Ixopo, Natal. A BHIKA, Lutchman, bldg. contractor; 6b. Ladysmith, July 20, 1925; s. of Bhika, educ. Estcourt Indian School; m. 1 d. Pub- lic activities: Wice- president N.I.C., Pmb. branch; pres. Child Welfare Society 1954- 57; pres. Indian Resi- dents’ Assoc. of Ples- sislaer; pres. Land Owners’ Assoc., Mt. Partridge; pres. Mt. Willows Sports Club, Mt. Partridge; patron Woodlands Students’ Social Club; vice-pres. Deepavali Cheer Soc.; pres. Vedic Yuvuk Sabha 1950-56: pres. Pirates F.C. 1954-55, manager Plessis- laer Willows F.C. 1952-53; mem. A.B.S.; pres. Vijay Bhajan Mundal. Recreation: Music, reading. Address: c/o 500 Pietermaritz Street, Phone 22752, Pieter- maritzburg. —> BHIKHABHAI, Govindgee, hairdresser and general merchant; b. Kanhi, Baroda State; e. s. of Govindjee Morar; educ. Cape Town; m. Vajaibhan, d. of Morar Jaga, of Sarbhon; 3 s., 3 d. Came to South Africa 1919, settled in Cape Town; assoc. with father’s bus.; 1930 estd. Springbok Cafe and Govindjee’s Hair- dressing Salon. Public activities: Mem. Cape Hindu C.C. Recreation: Sport. Address: 85 Buitengracht St.. Cape Town. BHOOLA, Ahmed Is- mail, B.A., LL.B.; educ. Sastri College, N.U.C. and Wits.; b. 1922; m. Ameena, d. of E. Kolia, of Dbn.: 1 s.: s. of late Hajee Ismail Suleman Bhoola. Public Act.: Took an active part in Student Affairs: played Cricket for Sastri College; active in College Debates and Theatricals; ; Speaker of the Inter- ; national Parliament- é ary Debating Soc.; mem. N.LC.; prolific correspondent to the Press under the pen name “Poli- ticus”, his articles appearing in S.A’s. Indian News- paper “The Leader,” are cagerly looked forward to each week; one of S.A’s. most prominent writers in the political field. Rec.: Gardening. Add.: Bus., 25 Baker St., Durban; Res., 15 Leathern Rd., Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO A BHIMJEE, Mathoor; jeweller; b. Porbander; educ. Clare Estate Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; only s. of late Bhimjee Anund; m. Kustoor, 2nd d. of M. Devaraj of Durban; 6 s., 2 d. On leaving sch. was assoc. with father’s bus. std. own business in Sparks Rd., Durban, in 1936; has a branch store in Victoria St., trading as Sagar Jewellers. Pub. act.: Mem. of the Kathiawad Hindu Assn.; was a mem. of the Sydenham Tennis Club. Rec.: Sports. Address: Bus., 86b Victoria St., Durban; Res., 133 North St., Durban. BHIMJEE, Kustoor; jeweller; b. Stanger, 1917; d. of late M. Dewraj; educ. at Stanger Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. Mathoor Bhimjee; 6 s., 2 d. Assoc. with brother’s bus., trading as Kassanjee Jewellers; served apprenticeship with her brother, now partner in hus- band’s business, trading as Sagar Jewellers. Only qualified woman manufacturing jeweller in S.A. Holds a manufacturer’s licence. By 39 We THE MATHOOR BHIMJEE FAMILY BHIMJEE, Vryajlal; jeweller; b. Durban, 1936; e. s. of M. Bhimjee; educ. Clairwood Sch. Connected with father’s business. BHIMJEE, Dhirajlal; jeweller; b. 1938, Dur- ban; educ. Clairwood Sch. Connected with father’s business. ye

---

## Page 8

‘40 THE SOUTH AFRICAN BHOJA, Mahomed Moosa, general dealer; b. Vesma, . Navsari, India, in 1886; s. of Moosajee Abhramjee Bhoja; educ. in India; m. Havjee, d. of Moosa-Daya; 2s. 1 d. Came to South Africa in 1903. Began business in Boksburg in 1911, Benoni 1913, Delmas in 1920, and back to Benoni in 1955. Chairman, Muslim Committee, Vesma. Address: P.O. Box 5073, Benoni South, Transvaal. BHOOLA, Laloo Bhai, shoe trade; b. Khani, India, 1914; s. of H. Bhoola; educ. St. Pauls Sch.; 1 s.: estd. business in Kimberley in 1939; later transferred to Cape Town, trading under the style of Woodstock Shoe Repairer. Recreation: Cricket. Address: Res., Dobson Road, Athlone. Cape Town; Bus., 23 Albert Road, Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 58241. — > BITSHOO, Joris Ramsewak, school- master; m. d. of late Mr. & Mrs. Seethal- persad, of Shallcross; educ. St. Aidan’s Boys’ Sch. and Dayanand National High Sch.. Delhi, matriculated (Punjab University). Sanscrit as second language, passed Vis- harad Hindi Exam. at Dayanand Maha Up- deshaak Vidyalaya, Lahore; was gen. sec. Arya Kumar Sabha; edited “Arya Kumar,” official organ Arya Kumar Sabha; was hon. sec. The League of Honour, Delhi; travelled extensively in India; taught at Spring- field Ind. Sch., Cato Manor, Sir Kurma Reddy and A.Y.S. Govt.-aided Ind. Schools; organised and was first pres. Arya Sangeet Mandal, Durban; was head- master of Hindu Sch., Salisbury, S. Rhodesia; was organiser and pres. Salisbury Ind. F.C.; managed several teams to tour P.E.A., N. Rhodesia, Bechuana- land, Belgian Congo, Nyasaland; organised and con- ducted Sunday services at Salisbury Hindu Temple; returned to Durban; estd. bus. gen. dealers, estate, insurance and financial agents and property sales- men; sold up for health reasons and took up dairy farming; later rejoined the teaching profession, teach- ing at V.P.S. Shri Vishnu School; presently teacher at St. Paul’s Sch. and ex-principal of V.D.S. Hindi Sch.; founder and pres. Arya Sangeet Sangh; ex-treas. Raisethorpe Arya Nauw Yuvuk Sabha; member N.LT.S.; composed Hindi and Urdu songs and has written several poems. Address: 559 Longmarket St., Pietermaritzburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO BOB, Anthony Emmanuel, tailor; b. 19J0, E.L.; e. s. of R. Bob; educ. St. Francis Xavier Mission Sch.; m. Francis Caroline. d. of M. Krull, of Kimberley; 3. s., I d. Bus.: On leaving. sch. estd. tailor’s..bus, at Argyle St., now trad- ing at 6 Porter St., E.L.; was mem. Ind. Assoc. of E.L.; pres. of Catholic Men’s Soc.; pres. Vincent De Paul Soc.; mem. Catholic Bishops Campaign formed to raise funds for Bantu Educ. Act; joined Frontier F. Assn. 1929; sec. and treas. Stars F.C. 1932-34; dele- gate Stars F.C. to Frontier F.A. 1935-36; pres. Stars F.C. 1939; sec. Frontier I.F.A. 1940; delegate S.A. I.F.A. 1940-41; reprsid. Frontier I.F.A. at P.E. 1941; treas. Border J.F.A. 1943-46; pres. Border [.F.A. 1943; delegate to S.A.I.F.A. 1943-45; delegate S.A.I.- F.A. 1947; pres. Cape Quadrangular LF.A. 1952; pres. E.L. Coloured C.U. 1947-54; treas. Border Inter-race Soc. Board 1953-54; manager B.C.C.U. Tournament - Barnato Board, Jhb. 1955; hon, life vice-pres. Border LF.A.; treas. and played for Hillview Tennis Club 1947-56; pres. Border I.F.A. 1956-58; pres. Catholic Men’s Soc.; pres. St. Vincent de Paul Soc. Address: 6 Porter St., East London, C.P.. Phone 5474. BOBAT, Mahomed Ismail, wholesale mer- chant; b. Durban, September 15, 1902; e. s. of late Ismail Mahomed Bobat; m. e. d. of Ebrahim Essop Asmaj (late sen. part- ner of B. Ebrahim Ismail & Co.); 2 s., 4 d.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School. Managing director of the Kathorian Trading Co. (Pty.), Ltd., whole- sale merchants and direct importers; dir- ector of the Invincible Land & Estate Agency (Pty.), Ltd.; Variety Bazaar (Pty.), Ltd.; Asmal Whole- salers (Pty.), Ltd.; B.E.J. Investments (Pty.), Ltd.; M. E. Asmall (Pty.), Ltd.; chief agent for Natal, the Lon- don & Lancashire Insurance Co., Ltd.; also agent for Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada. Public acti- vities: Vice-pres., Natal Indian Organisation. Keenly interested in all public activities for the advancement of the Indian community. Recreation: Angling. Add.: Bus., 89 Albert Street, Durban; Res., 185 Mansfield Road, Durban. we THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 4l M. N. BHOOLA FAMILY & BHOOLA, Maka Narotam, retired merchant; b. Ramdar, 1888, Dist. Surat; s. of N. Bhoola; educ. India; m. Dhanoo, e. d. of K. Ratanjee, of Ramdar, India; 3. s., 5 d. Bus.: Was assoc. with father’s bus. at Sutherlands; was in sole control 1916-1930; founded Durban firm of N. Bhoola & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., in 1930, later founded the firm of Harilal Maneklal & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., at 65 Victoria St., Durban; also founded of firm M. Bhoola & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., at Sutherlands, Pietermaritzburg. Retired 1950. Pub. act.: Trustee of V.D.S., Pietermaritzburg, and one of the founders of the Ind. crematorium; con- tributed the largest sum of money for the purpose; was associated with Surat Hindu Educ. Soc.; donor to Mahatma Gandhi Ward at McCord Hospital; presented with silver salver by Surat Hindu Assoc. and Surat Hindu Educ. Soc. in appreciation of his services in erecting the Surat Hindu G.A.L.S. at Bharat Hall, Durban, in 1954; Chairman Surat Hindu Educ. Soc. 10 years; vice-chairman Surat Hindu Assn. Died April, 1959. BHOOLA, Harilal Maka, merchant; ce. s. M. N. Bhoola; b. Plessislaer, Natal 1919; m. Shantaben; 3 s., 1 d.; educ. E.P. Sch., Pietermaritzburg, and Carlisle St. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Durban. Bus: Joined N, Bhoola & Co. at Suther- lands, 1936. Later became shareholder and director N. Bhoola & Sons, Durban; estd. Union Talkie Distributors in 1939; assoc. with firm Dalal Maneklal Shivlal & Co., of Calcutta and Bombay. Pub. act.: Mem. Surat Hindu Assn. and Surat Hindu Educ. Soc., Durban; patron Central Lawn Tennis Club and United C.C. Visited India, 1948. Address: 45 Leathern Rd., Durban. BHOOLA, Ishwar Maka, merchant; b. Sutherlands, 1927; educ. Greyville Ind. Sch., Durban; m. Varumati; 2 s., 2 d. Bus.: Joined firm Harilal Maneklal BHOOLA, Bhana Maka, merchant; 2nd s. of M. N. Bhoola; b, Plessislaer, Natal, Dec. 17, 1925; m. Ramila, d. of R. Vithaldas of Bombay; educ. Hindu Tamil Instit. and Greyville Govt.-aided Ind, Sch. Bus.: Joined firm of shippers (Dalal Shivlal & Co.), Bombay; later left for S.A. and joined father’s bus., M. N. Bhoola, 179a Grey St.; admitted to the wholesale firm Harilal Maneklal & Co. (Pty.), Ltd. at 65 Victoria St., Durban; also director M. Bhoola & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., of Plessislaer; went overseas to astablish firm of exporters— Alliance Trading Co., Bombay. Pub. act.: Mem. Surat Hindu Assoc. and ore Hindu Educ, Soc. Rec.: Table Tennis. Address: 62 Leathern Rd., urban. & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., 65 Victoria St., Durban, as shareholder and director; managed the firm Alliance Trading Co. at Bombay, 1951; returned to S.A. 1952; took charge of M. Bhoola & Co. (Pty.), Ltd., of Sutherlands, Pieter- maritzburg; estd. firm Alliance Milling & trading Co. and Bhoola’s Garage at Sutherlands, 1955. Pub. act.: Takes an active part in all affairs affecting the Indian community. Rec.: Tennis; mem. Plessislaer Tennis Club. Address: Box 1, Plessislaer, Natal.

---

## Page 9

42 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO > The Late Daya Narotam Bhoola Family © BHOOLA, Narotam (late); ob. Rander, Surat. One of the pioneer Indian mer- chants. Settled in Sutherlands, near Pietermaritzburg. Founded the well known business of N. Bhoola in 1901, which subsequently included sons as partners. Was always interested in the welfare of his community and helped in this con- nection. Is survived by a widow and 1 daughter and 5 sons— Maka, Thakor, Laloo, Ishwar and Thribovan. BHOOLA, Doctor Keshavial Daya, B.Sc. (Hygiene), M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., L.A.H., M.P.S.1.; e. s. of the late Daya N. Bhoola; b. Plessislaer (Sutherlands), 24th April, 1928; educ. at Sastri College, proceeded to Fort Hare in 1947, where he obtained degree in B.Sc. (Hygiene). In 1950 proceeded to University College, Dublin (Ireland) for medical studies, gradu- ated in 1955, having obtained honours in the follow- ing subjects: Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology, Ophthalmology and Midwifery. In the same year also wrote examination at the Apothecaries Hall, Dublin and obtained the L.A.H. degree. Has been appointed mem. of the Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland. Returned to South Africa in 1956 and joined McCords Zulu Hospital, Durban. In 1957 made an extensive tour of India returning in 1958. Has started Medical Practice in Durban at 72 Acorn Rd. Address: Res., 42 Hampson Grove, Phone 25781. BHOOLA, Daya Narotam (late); b. Rander, India, 1900; educ. Sutherlands and St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham. On leav- ing school joined father’s business at Plessislaer. In 1955 joined the well known firm of N. Bhoola & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Dur- ban, with which he was connected till his death. Was connected with all the public activities. Survived by widow, 4 d., 3 s — Keshavial, Kanti, and Navin. BHOOLA, Doctor Kanti Daya, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., B.Sc. (Pathology); 2nd s. of the late Daya N. Bhoola; b. Plessislaer (Sutherlands), 11th Oct., 1930; matriculated at Sastri College with First Class Honours; completed first year medical B.A. at Witwatersrand University, Johannesburg, proceeded to Ireland and joined University College, Dublin. Had a brilliant university career, obtaining honours in first, second, and third year studies; received the Doctor Henry Hutchison Stuart Scholarship in Anatomy and Physiology; obtained first prize in anatomy disections, which are on display in College Medical Museum, Dublin; passed final medical examination with honours in medicine and surgery in 1956; graduated in B.Sc. Pathology in 1957 with first class honours. Joined City General Hospital, Stoke-on-Trent, England. BHOOGLA, Navin Daya; 3rd s. of late Daya N. Bhoola; b. Plessislaer (Suther- lands) 9th August, 1935; educ. at Wood- lands High School, Maritzburg. Has pro- ceeded to Dublin, Ireland, for further studies. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 43 THE THAKOR NAROTAM BHOOLA FAMILY BHOOLA, Narotam (late); b. Rander, Surat. One of the pioneer Ind. merchants, settled in Sutherlands, near Pietermaritz- burg. Founded the well known business of N. Bhoola in 1901, which subsequently included sons as partners. Was always interested in the welfare of his community and helped in this connection. Is sur- vived by a widow, 1 d. and 5 s.—Maka, Thakor, Laloo, Ishwar and Thribovan. BHOOLA, Jamnadas Thakor; director of companies; Ist s. of T. N. Bhoola; b. 4th August, 1925, Plessis- laer (Sutherlands); educ. at Sastri College and University of Natal; m. Champa Iswarlal (B.A.) Bombay. Since 1945 joined the well known business of N. Bhoola & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban, of which he is now a director. Also a director of several private investment companies. Pub, act.: Actively interested in several social and educational organisa- tions. Presently treasurer of the Surat Hindoo Educational Society. BHOOLA, Chagan Thakor; director of companies; 2nd s. of T. N. Bhoola; b. 20th December, 1926, Plessislaer (Sutherlands); educ. at Sastri College; Surat, India. Since 1947 joined well known firm of N. Bhoola & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., Durban, of which he is now a director. Also. director of several private investment companies. Pub. act.: Interested in several social religious organisations. During 1953 made an exten- sive tour of the United King- dom and Continent, meeting business executives. and BHOOLA , Thakor Narotam; director of companies; 3rd son of Narotam Bhoola; b. Plessislaer (Sutherlands), January 7th, 1907; m. Thapi Harkisson of Surat, India; educ. York Rd. Govt. Ind. Sch. On leaving sch. joined father’s bus. at Plessislaer. Since 1930 connected with the now well known firm of N. Bhoola & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., 67 Victoria St., Durban, of which he is the managing director. Has been appointed a director of the Liberty Building Society, Durban; director of various private investment companies. During the Second World War was a Government- appointed mem. for Natal on the South African Rice Committee and Spice Committee. Pub. act.: Founda- tion member of the Surat Hindu Educational Soc., which runs a Gujerati School with an enrolment of over 600 children. A trustee on the Indian Medical Trust Board. Is connected with the St. Aidan’s Ind. Hospital, M. L. Sultan Technical College and Surat Hindoo Govt.-aided Sch. Rec.: Interested in all social and religious activities. Address: 52 Botanic Gardens Rd., Durban; bus. phone, 20177 and 61786; Res., 49216. m. Mani Hiralal of

---

## Page 10

44 THE SOUTH AFRICAN L. N. BHOOLA FAMILY | BHOOLA, Laloo | Narotam, wholesale merchant; b. Sept. 10, 1910, Plessislaer, Pietermaritzburg; 4th s. of Narotam Bhoola; educ. Sutherlands Ind. Sch.; m. Paravatie, e. d. of late Maganlal Kalidas, Surat, India; 3s, 4 di Bus.: Bhoola_ Bros., estd. 1946; branch _ store, Edendale, trading as L. N. Bhoola; manag- ing director in father’s business in Plessislaer, known as Narotam Bhoola & Co., till 1940; afterwards directo. in firm of N. Bhoola & Sons (Pty.), Ltd., 67 Victoria St., Durban, till 1946. Opened wholesale business, trading as Bhoola Bros., Prince Edward St., Durban. Pub. act.: Mem. Pietermaritzburg Veda Dharma Sabha; Plessislaer Arya Samaj; Surat Hindu Assn., Durban. Recrea- tion: A keen sportsman. Address: Bus., Phone 27852, 109 Prince Edward St., Durban; Res., 7 Winterton Walk, Phone 25407, Durban. BHOOLA, Nanubhai Laloo, businessman; b. Nov. 28, 1932, Plessislaer, Pieter - maritzburg; e. s. of Laloo Bhoola; educ. Greyville Govt. Sch. and Sastri College, Durban; m. Business: Partner in _ father’s business at Edendale, trading as L. i Bhoola. Pub. act.: Mem. of _ several social bodies at Plessislaer. Recrea- tion: Tennis. Add.: Phone 28634, Box 8, Edendale, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO I. N. BHOOLA FAMILY BHOOLA Ishwar Narotam, general mer- chant; b. Plessislaer, Natal, Sept. 17, 1913; s. of Narotam Bhoola; educ. in vernac. and English in India, and also at Carlisle Street School, Durban; m. Jessie, e. d. of Hari- shoon; 4 s., 4 d. Busi- ness: General mer- chant. Public activi- ties: Life mem. Ples- sislaer Arya Samaj; life president, Plessis- laer Sporting Club; donor classroom in Arya Samaj School; trustee, Edendale Welfare Society; interested in soccer; mem. Plessislaer Clug. Address: P.O. Box 22, Phone 27, Edendale, Natal. BHOOLA, Mansook Ishwar; business manager; b. Plessis- laer, Jan. 9, 1939; e. s. of Ishwar Bhoola; educ. Carlisle St. Govt-.aided Ind. Sch. and Sastri College, Durban. After leav- ing college, joined his father in business— Macibisi Cash Store, wholesalers and re- tailers. Pub. act.: Takes keen interest in community life, soccer and tennis. Address: P.O. Box 22, Phone 27, Edendale, Natal. ~ BISSERU, Rookmini, housewife; b. Tongaat, Natal; d. of Jharee Misthry of Clare Estate, Bisseru; Of humble origin but the driving force behind the amazing achieve- ments of her children. B2 THE SOUTH AFRICAN THE BISSERU FAMILY & BISSERU, Rambaehan, wholesale merchant; b. 1919, Clare Estate, Durban; s. of B. Bisseru; educ. Clare Estate Ind. Sch.; m. Rookmoney, e. d. of Mohan of Overport, Durban; 2 s., 3 d.; Bus. act.: Estd. Premier Book Bazaar (wholesale and 1949, later m. B. Sewing. retail) in partnership with brother, extended business to include Premier Bazaar Extension, 86 Victoria St., Durban, and Premier Wholesalers, dealers in Electrical Appli- ances, and Radios and Spares. Pub. act.: Mem. Clare Estate Child Welfare Soc.; Sydenham United Rover Crew. Rec:.: farming. Address: Bus., 196a Grey St., Durban; Res., 62 Kennedy Rd., Clare Estate, Durban. BISSERU, Balideo, Dr., M.Sc. Hons. (S.A.), Ph.D. (Lond.), M.R.C.S. (Lon- don), L.R.C.P. (England), M.B.B.S. (Lon.); F.Z.S. (Lon.); b. Clare Estate, Durban, April 10, 1927; 3rd s. of Bisseru; educ. Clare Estate Ind. Sch., Sastri College, matriculated in 1944, took the T3b in 1945; Fort Hare Col- lege, 1948-51, completing B.Sc. (dist. in Chemistry and Zoology) B.Sc. Hons. (dist. in Zoology), M.Sc. Hons. (dist. in Zoology); went to London Sch. of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine; Fellow of the Zoological Society (1953); obtained Ph.D. (London) (1954); obtained University and State Scholarships for Research. Rec.: Theatre and travel. Poultry INDIAN WHO’S WHO 45 Book mem. BISSERU, Ballaram, businessman; b. June 6, 1921, Clare Estate, Durban; educ. Clare Estate Ind. Sch.; m. Devmathie, e. d. of Ramluckan of Avoca, Natal; 3 s., 1 d. Bus. act.: Estd. firm Premier Book Bazaar at 196a Grey St., Durban, in 1949 as Wholesale and Retail Book Sellers and Stationers, was joined by brother in partnership in 1950. Also dealers in Electrical Appliances, Radios and Spares. Formerly employed by the firm of Rahman Khan & Sons for 13 years. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 62 Kennedy Rd., Clare Estate, Durban. BISSERU, Burran, retired caterer; b. in Verulam in 1892; m. Rookmini, e. d. of Jharee Misthry of Clare Estate; 3 s., 3 d. Address: Res., 62 Kennerdy Rd., Clare Estate, Durban.

---

## Page 11

46 THE SOUTH AFRICAN BODASING, Harry- sing, cane planter; b. New Guelderland, January 10, 1912; s.0. late B. Bodasing; educ. Sastri College; m. Dharamdevi, d.o. late R. B. Maharaj, of Pmburg.; after her demise married Paras. dio. I. K. Maharaj; was associated with father’s farming busi- : ness, launched out on jl own business in 1943; ‘ [¥ one of the largest ; fs cane growers in the — ii country. Public activi- ties: Chairman of the Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assoc.; chairman of the New Guelderland Indian Mill Group; vice-pres. of the National Veld Trust Council; trustee of the A. P. Sabha, Natal; trustee of the Tugela Ind. Sch., ex- grantee of the New Guelderland Ind. Sch.; com- missioner of oaths for Lower Tugela Districts; former director of Central Cinemas, Stanger; vice-pres. of Lower Tugela V.D.S.; made liberal contributions to charitable institutions, including a donation of £8,000 towards the erection of an Assembly Hall at the M. L. Sultan Technical College; erected a sch. at New Guelderland for the Indian children; visited India with his family. Recreation: Fishing and garden- ing. Address: “Lucknow,” New Guelderland, Natal, Phone 4; Bus., P.O. New Guelderland, Natal. BODASING, Rajdeo Singh, b. New Guel- derland; 4th s. of late Babu Bodasing; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Ind. Sch., Dbn.; m. e. d. of late D. Bram- daw, retired civil ser- vant. A leading cane planter in the country. Proprietor National Fuel Supply, 236 Um- geni Road (Phone 2-4974 and 2-4480). Started the Ind. Govt.- Aided Sch. at New Guelderland, of which he is the manager. As a family. the highest donor to the Sastri College Building Fund; visited India 1932-33, again 1938-39 with family, and also in 1952; also toured United Kingdom and the Con- tinent. Address: “Rajdene,’ New Guelderland, Natal; Res.. 12 Mitchell Cres., Durban, Phone 36881. INDIAN WHO’S WHO BODHANYA, Yusuff, general dir. & broker; b. Palmfort, Tvl. June 13. 1913; e. s. of Moosa Bodhanva, of Jhb.; educ. Private studies; m. to Kath- leen; | s., 3 d. Estd. bus. 1934 as _ Bod- hanya’s Commercial Agencies and repres. several insurance com- panies; authorised dealers and distribu- tors for Messrs. H. Polliack & Co., Ltd.; has travelled exten- sively in U.S.A., the United Kingdom and Continent, Canada, {India and East Africa. Hobby: Angling. Address: Bus., 4 New Court Chambers, 44 Commissioner Street, Johannesburg, P.O. Box 4080, Phone 330359. BRIDGEM OHAN, Sookai; estate agent; Sth s. of D. Sookai, Sea Cow Lake; educ. Newlands Govt. Aided School, Umgeni Govt. School and Sastri Col- lege; m. Suminthra, e. d. of Chirai, of Dur- ban North; 2 s.. 4 d. Business: Bridgemohan & Co., estate agents, est. 1942. Appointed Com. of Oaths in 1947. Licensed Indian auctioneer. Public activities: Grantee Newlands Govt. Aided School; chairman, Newlands School Board since 1939; sec. and now chairman, Vishnu Temple, Sea Cow Lake since 1941; ex-treas. S.A. Maha Sabha 1949-1954; pres. Inter-Dist. C. Union; trustee and chairman Sea Cow Lake Ceme- tery; Mem. F.O.S.A. and Child Welfare Society; did much in flood relief in 1935 and in 1953, and during the Native riots of 1953; helped in the building of the Newlands and Luxmi Ind. Schools. Sport: Patron, Queens C.C.; life vice-pres. North Coast Grounds Assn.; life vice-pres. N.C.C. Club; patron Temple F.A.; patron Verulam & Dist. C. Club; mem. exec. Natal C. Union; pres. Inter-Dist. C. Union. Address: Bus., 39 Cross Street, Durban, Phone 27654; Res., 393 Inanda Road, Sea Cow Lake, Durban. 2 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO The Phaljieth Bookhan Family 47 & BOOKHAN, Phaljieth; mer- chant; b. Pietermaritzburg, March 19; educated St. Anthony’s, Pietermaritzburg, and self study; m. e. d. of Jagernath of New England; 5s. 3 d. Estd. Bookhan’s Potato Bazaar and Fresh Produce Bus. in 1936, later expanded to general dealer in 1942. Pub. act.: Trustee Veda Dharma Sabha; H.L.V.P. Shree Vishnu Temple; appointed visitor to Pietermaritzburg Prison; has rendered outstanding service to the Hindu comm. in Pietermaritzburg chiefly in the field of religion. Add.: 490 Church St., Phone 22280; Box 263, Pieter- maritzburg; Res., 568 Long- market St., Phone 28157. BOOKHAN, Hematraj; b. Pietermaritzburg, 19323; educ, Woodlands Govt. Sec. Sch.; Bus: Proprietor Shehnai Stores. Pub. act.: Mem. Woodlands O. B. Club, Daffs Football Club. Toured India 1956-1957. Rec.: Travelling, films. MOHAN, Phaljieth; b. Pietermaritzburg, 1923; educ, Woodlands Govt. Ind. Sec. Sch.; m. S. Rajputhie; 1d. Occ. bus. owner trad- ing as Bookhan Bros. at 503 Church St, and Central Hairdressing Saloon at No. 1, 1st Floor, Medina Bldg., 480 Church St. Pieter- maritzburg. Pub. act.: Council mem. of Veda Dharma Sabha and Shree Vishnu Temple. Toured India in 1952. Rec.: Sports, reading. Address: 503 Church St., Pietermaritz- burg, Natal.

---

## Page 12

48 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 2 The Dhanee Bramdaw Family & RRAMDAW, Dhaaee (late); editor and founder of “The Leader’? and “The S.A. Indian Who's Who”: b. Pietermaritz- burg: ¢.s. of late D, Bramdaw; educ. Pictermaritzburg, Durban and South African Native College, Fort Hare; Law Classes, Pietermaritzburg. Resigned teaching post in Government service to take up higher education. First Indian to start on daily newspaper work, joining in 1926 “The Natal Witness,”’ first as contributor, and then became Indian editor, continuing work in departments and for some time in charge of editorial library, Correspondent of other daily newspapers and attached to Sir Fazl-i Hussain delegation, 1931-32, as Reuter’s special correspondent; represented Reuter at various non-European conferences at Durban, Johannesburg. Capztown, Bloemfontein, ete., and for a time in charge of Reuter’s general service in Pietermaritzburg. Was acting chief editor of ““Africopa News Agency,’? Capetown, 1934, declined permanency in order to carry out other journalistic activities. Was invited by Brigadier Desmond Young, well known cditor and Author of “Rommel,”’ for editorial work in India, 1939. His services have been utilised by the various Agents-Gencral of tie Government of India for special journalistic work. South African correspondent of ‘‘The Hindu,”’ Madras, “The Pioneer,” Lucknow, ‘The Madras Mail,” and correspondent of ‘The Sunday Times,’ “The Rand Daily Mail,’”’ “The Natal Mercury,” etc. Publications: other editorial Reuters: was Editor, “The South African Indian Who’s Who & Commercial Directory,’’ ‘*Sastri BRAMDAW, Saraswati; b. King Williams Town; m. Dhance Speaks”; author, “Out of the Stable,’’ and special articles on Indian affairs. Appeared before many Select Committees and Commissions, including the Bledisloe Royal Commission, on the invitation of Rho- desian Indians, which enquired into the subject of closer union of the of S.A. National Indian newspaper, Rhodesias and Nyasaland, 1938. Founded “The Leader,’’ South “The Leader,’ & “S.A. Indian Africa’s National Indian newspaper, 1940. Died at sea 4th July, 1952, Who's Who.” Pub. Act. Exec. while on a voyage to England. BRAMDAW, Sunil educ, St. Paul’s Sch. & Woodland’s, bration Comm.; Mem. Indian Child Mrs. and late Welfare, Institute of Race Rela- Proceeded to Eng- tions; Mem. Civil Rights League & Jand 1953. Attended “'Chicheley Hall” Pietermaritzburg Indian Womens’ Dhance Bramdaw. BRAMDAW, Hiron- moyee Radha; b. 1937; e.d.o. Mrs. D, Bram- daw. Attended Bedford Sch. as boarder. Was House Prefect & Deputy Head of House, Form Head and served on “TT? Committee, Mem. of Film and Music Clubs. Played Cricket, Tennis and Net Ball. Later completed Secretarial Course at Triangle Coll., London, & attended classes at Lond. Literary Inst, Formerly student at Indian Girls’ High Schl., Pietermaritz- burg. S.A. Rec.: Photography. Dhance Bramdaw. Needlework Prize, maritzburg, S.A. Pietermaritzburg; ¢.s.o. Interests: Theatre and Photography. BRAMDAW, Reena; b, 1943, Pictermaritzburg. Student Elliott Sch., London, y.do. Mrs. & late 1956-57; awarded special prizes for Pottery. Has had her work on exhibi- Westminster. Mem. of School’s Hockey, Tennis, Netball and Rounders Teams. Mem. of National London History Club. Attends music classes (piano). Rec.: Swimming. Formerly student at St. tion at County Hall. Paul’s School, Picter- Mem. Indo-European Jt. Council, Aryan Benevolent Home, Pieter- B.... 1938; maritzburg Indian Centenary Cele- and “‘Whittlebury Lodge’? Schools; Assoc.; Patron _ Pietermaritzburg School and House Captain; awarded Tech. Students’ Soc. and Divine colours for saccer, cricket and athletics. Life Society. Studied music (violin), Now studying at Westminster College. Interests: Classical music & needle- work, Add.: P.O, Box 678, Picter- maritzburg. South Africa. BRAMDAW, Paulin Rai; b 1940, Sixth Form student at Elliott Sch.; 2nd s.o. Mrs. & late Dhanee Bramdaw. President of Students’ Council. House Captain and Head Boy since 1956. Awarded Governor’s Prize for Leader- chip, 1956-57. Capt. 1st Rugby XV. Plays wing forward for lst XV. Awar- ded colours for rugby. Formerly student at St. Paul's Sch., Pietermaritzburg, S.A. BRAMDAW, Sushil Rais b. 1947; y.s.o Mrs. and late Dhance Bramdaw; educ. St. Paul's Sch., Pietermar- itzburg. now student at Elfiot Sch., London. Mem. 5th Putney Seca Scouts Company. Rec.: Football. Hobby: Science. 1957-58; awarded Bramdaw, 14th March, 1936; d.o. R. Panday, 4 s, 2 d.; educ. Patterson High Sch. Bus. Managing Director Bramdaw Publications (Pty.), Ltd. Entered business on death of her husband. Proprictress BRAMDAW, Mohil Rai; 3rd son Mrs. & late D. Bramdaw; educ. St. Paul's Sch., Pietermaritzburg, and Elliot Sch,, London; b. 3rd May, 1941. Pub. Act. Capt. of Boxing Team. Boxing Champion, Wands- worth and South London, 1957-58 (Senior Division): runner-up for the title of Great Britain at a match fougnt at Empress Hall, April, 1957; runner-up for title of Great Britain Senior Div.) at Brighton, 1958; received Runners-up Medal for South London Clubs Knock-out Competi- tion, 1956-57: received S. London Certificate & Badg> ‘or representing the schools n London Athletic Cham- sionships, 1957. Won Sch, Medal for Football, 1956- 1957; awarded Dane Hse. Prize, 1957; awarded Old Boys Prize, 1958: left full- back sch. snr. football team; represented Hse. at Boxing, Athletics, Cricket, Basket Ball & Cross-country; awar- ded colours for Boxing & Football. Mem. Avenue Boys’ Club. THE SOUTH AFRICAN BRIDGLALL, Suk- rajh, school teacher; b. Natal, 4th Feb., 1925; s. o. B. Marrie; educ., matriculated 1943; holds Afri- kaans Voorbereidende and Laer _ Taal- eksamen Certificates; presently studying for University Degree; m. Shobhana, d. o. Mr. and Mrs. Lalbe- hari, 2 s. Pub. act.: Formerly Ind. Health & Social Investigator to Edendale Health Commission; com- menced teaching 1946 at Mt. Partridge; now on staff of B. & M. School, Raisethorpe; sec. Raisethorpe Ratepayers Assoc.; vice-pres. and auditor Raisethorpe Arya Samaj; council mem. Raisethorpe Recreation Club; mem. Exec. of Ind. Centenary Comm, Pmb.; vice-pres. Nishaan Theatrical Entertainers; has travelled The Rhodesias, Portuguese East Africa and the Union. Rec.: Tennis and music. Address: P.O. Box 749, Pmb., Natal. fs BUDHAI, Jugmohan, vice-prin.; b. Clare Estate, June 15, 1917; 2nd s. of E. Budhai; m. Deopathy, d. of late Ram Suchith, of Avoca; 4 s, 1 d.; educ. Clare Est. Ind. Sch., private studies and at the M. L. Sul- tan Tech. Coll.; com- menced teaching at the Chowthee G.-A.I. Sch. Sawoti; trans- ferred to Govt.-Aided Platoon Sch. at Clair- wood; also taught at following schs.: New- lands 1942; Hillview Govt.-aided in 1944; acting prin. at Clareville 1952-53; vice-prin. Port Shepstone Govt.-aided Sch. 1955; completed Natal Teachers Senior Cert. in 1951. Pub- lic activities: Vice-pres. Clare Estate Ind. Educ. Board; took an active interest in the establishment of the Clareville Ind. Sch.; was treas, of F.O.S.A. (Clare Est. Care Comm.) and also mem. of the Port Shep- stone branch of F.O.S.A.; mem. of the Grants Comm. of F.O.S.A.; mem. Clare Estate Cemetery and Crematorium; com. mem. Clare Estate Child Wel- fare Soc.; council mem. Port Shepstone Ind. Child Welfare Soc.; pres. Port Shepstone Angling Assoc.; pres. Clare Estate Athletic and Cycling Club; com. mem. of Port Shepstone and Dist. Hindu Sabha. Rec.: Angling, reading. Address: Bus., Govt. Ind. Sch., P.O. Box 68, Port Shepstone, Phone 476; Res., Albersville Rd., Port Shepstone, Phone 427. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 49 BUDHAI, Bechoo, cane planter and farmer; b. Umzinto, 1900; e. s. of Bodhai, of Umzinto’ m. Mithu, e.d. of Chadie; 5s. 3 d.; started cane farming in 1934; also fruit and vegetable farmer. Public activi- ties: Grantee of Gov- ernment-Aided Indian Sch, at Woodgrange- on-Sea; interested in the welfare of the community. Recrea- tion: Hunting. Add.: Bus., P.O. Box 6, Hibberdene, Natal. BUDREE, Ganga- deen, merchant; b. Richmond, Ntl., 1910; m. d. of Gajay, of Verulam, 2 s., 1 d. Bus., was employed as a salesman for R. Beachen, 1931-1942; moved to Richmond 1943; estd. own busi- ness in 1944, trading as Farmers’ Supply Store. Public activi- ties: Trustee & treas. “Gita Mundil,” Rich- mond; comm. mem. Richmond Sch. Brd.; associated with the religious and educa- tional activities in the district; donated a trophy to Richmond F.A. Address: Box 48, Richmond, Natal. BUDREE, Kunake, b. Verulam, 1913; m. G. Budree, of Richmond, Natal, 5 s., 1 d. Sun- day School teacher at Gita Mundal; also connected with the social activities in the dist. Rec.: Sewing. Add.: Box 48, Rich- mond, Natal.

---

## Page 13

50 THE SOUTH AFRICAN BUGHWAN, Dennis, photographer; b. In- anda, Natal, 1925; s. of late R. Bughwan; m. Devi, d. of Bhoo- lasingh, of Malvern, Natal; 2 s., 1 d. Bus.: Proprietor of Crown Studios, 119 Queen St.. Dbn., branch at 381 Church St., Pmb., business was estd. by his late father, being one of the leading photographers in S.A. Was direc. of Pakco (Pty.), Ltd., Verulam, Natal. Rec.: Table tennis. Add.: Bus., 119 Queen Street. Durban, Phone 27031; Res., 21 Hes- wall Road, Durban, Phone 45098. —— BUGHWAN, Devi, M.A.; Broadcaster (S.A.B.C.) and lecturer Clairwood Ind. High Sch.; conducts Indian session of S.A.B.C. on Sunday mornings; actively engaged with husband Dennis Bugh- wan in photogr. bus.; b. Mayville, Durban, May 15, 1926; d. of Bhoolasingh; educ. St. Aidan’s Girls’ School and Dbn. Girls’ H.S.; m. Dennis Bughwan, s. of late R. Bughwan of Dbn.; 2 s., 1 d. After matriculating at the Dbn. Girls’ H.S. proceeded to Fort Hare College and obtained the B.A. degree with distinction in English at the tender age of 18; on her return she joined the staff of Dartnell Crescent Sch. as a teacher; in 1947 married Dennis Bughwan, well known photo- grapher of Durban; in 1949 she obtained the M.A. degree in English, being the first Indian woman in South Africa and to date the only South African Indian woman to obtain this degree in South Africa; lectured in English at University of Natal in 1951; an accomplished amateur stage actress who has appeared in many prominent stage productions from time to time; interested in the educational, religious and cultural activities of the community; she is sec. of the Film Society (Durban International Club); visited England and the Continent in 1955. Recrea- tion: Table tennis. Address: Bus., 119 Queen Street, Durban, Phone 27031; Res., 21 Heswall Road, Dur- ban, Phone 45098. INDIAN WHO’S WHO BUGHWANDEEN, J.; b. Reunion, Natal, 1919; sec. Non-European Railway Passengers’ Assoc.; commis- sioner Non-European Railways; commissioner of oaths. Address: Res., 69 Umbilo Road, Durban and 43 Surbiton Road, Merebank, Natal, Phone 8-7554. BULSARA, Mohanlall Kassan, merchant; b. Bulsara, Dist. Surat, 1912; s. of Kassan Chiba; educ. India and Cape Town; m. Bhanoo Ben, d. of N. F. Bandsda of P.E.; 3 s.; formerly assoc. with father’s business, later traded in company with brother at Kloof Street, Cape Town; estd. own bus. trading as M. K. Bulsara, Public activities: Mem. Hindu Mochee Maha Sabha of S.A.; mem. Mochee Soc. C.T.; was mem. of Bharat C.C., C.T.; visited India several times. Recreation: Cricket and motoring. Address: Res., 1 Malan St., Cape Town, Phone 29677; Bus., 124 Kloof Street, Cape Town, Phone 32920. BUNDHOO, Dasarath (Kovid), b. 8th April, 1921, at Plessislaer; 3rd _s. of Mr. & Mrs. R. Bundhoo; m. Dur- gawathie, dio. Mrs. & the late F. Satyapal; educ. Sutherlands In- dian School and self studies; passed several higher examinations with merit; also awarded Hindi Dip- loma of Wardha, In- dia. Public activities: Sec./treas. Plessislaer Arya Samaj, 1939-58; H.L.V.P. _ Plessislaer A.S.; officially opened Arya Samaj hall, Plessislaer, in 1950; reprst. Leather- workers at National Congresses and Industrial Coun- cil meetings since 1947; vice-pres. S.A. Federation of Leather Trade Unions; chairman Nat. U. of Leather- workers (Pmb.); sec. Hindi Org. Comm. of Pmb.; council mem. of V.D.S., Pmb.; hon. auditor of Mt. Partridge Arya Samaj and Plessislaer Stree Samaj; delegate to Arya Pratinidhi Sabha (S.A.); delegate to H.M.S. (S.A.); delegate to Hindi Shiksha Sangh (S.A.); delegate to Nat. Ind. Council of Leather In- dustry of S.A.; producer/writer of the plays “Prince of Ayodhya” and “The Great Charioteer”; also writer of other plays in Hindi and English; awarded Ist prize in Hindi debating competition; won the Swami Bhawani Dayal debating trophy in 1952 and 1956; appointed commissioner and examiner of Hindi exams. by the Hindi Shiksha Sangh of S.A. Sports: Ex-treas. and comm. mem. of Plessislaer United T.C.; ex-vice-pres. of Plessislaer United F.C.; organiser of inter-race sports for workers. Address: P.O. Plessis- laer, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN BUNDHOO, Durga- wathie D., 2nd d. of Mrs. and the late F. Satyapal, of Pmb.; m D. Bundhoo in 1947; educ. St. Anthony’s Sch. & Pmb. Indian Girls Sch. and Wood- lands Ind. High Sch.; was on the staff of Methodists’ Ind. Sch. 1942-47; headmistress of Raisethorpe Platoon Sch., 1954/56. Public activ.: Chair- lady of Woodlands Girls’ Social Club, 1940/41; Comman- dant of the Red Cross 1943-47; interested in guiding; treas., now sec. of Pietermaritzburg Indian Women’s Ass.; pres. of Plessislaer Arya Stree Samaj; vice-pres. Arya Pra- tinidhi Sabha S.A.; patron Old Girls Club; comm. mem, of Pietermaritzburg Stree Samaj; mem. of N.C.W.; organiser of several fetes in aid of charity. Address: P.O, Plessislaer, Natal. CADER, Hoosen, b. Cape Town, March 29 SSI, Ss of Abdul Cader; educ. Cape Town; m. Zohra, 4 s., 4 dy assisted father in bus. at Port Elizabeth and later moved to Cape Town & estd. cafe trading under name of Hoosain Cader; opened branch at 2 Junction Road, Salt River; mem. of Surty Moslem Society; takes keen interest in mat- ters affecting Moslem community. Recrea- tion: Cricket. Address: 118 Hanover Street, Cape Town and 2 Junction Road, Salt River, Phone 53714. CALLAKOPPEN, Subhrey; general retail butcher; b. Germiston, May 25, 1925; s. of Poonsamy Calla- koppen; educ. Singh’s Govt. Ind. School; m. Rook- money, d. of S. M. Naidoo; 2 s., 1 d. Business: Medina Meat Market, est. 1950. Public activities: Hon. treas. East Rand I. Dist. F. Assn.; vice-pres. Germiston Indian Sports Board of Control; hon. life vice-pres. Happy Hearts F.C.; council mem. Blue Tennis Club; mem. Happy Hearts F.C.; plays tennis. Address: 868 Ist Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Germiston. CARA, Bhowan, gen. merchant; b. 1919, Vankanar, India; e.s. of late Cara, of India; educ. India and St. Paul’s Sch.; m. e.d. of M. Bhaga, 2 s., 4 d. Arrived from India 1913; assoc. with late father’s bus. at 478a Church St.; estd. own bus. at Raisethorpe. Rec.: Motoring. Add.: 478a Church St., Pietermaritzburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 51 CAJEE, Moinoddin, Accnt. & Travel Agt.; Dir. of Co.; Sec. of Co.; b. Tadkeswer, District Surat, India; s. of Hesamoddin Cajee; educ. Middle- burg Ind. and Col. Govt. Sch. Sch. of Accntncy.; widower, 2 s. Bus.: Dagbreek Cafe, est. 1955; Saloo- jee Cajee & Co., gen. agents. Mem. Trans- vaal Muslim League; International Soc. (Pty.). Ltd. Income tax, immigration con- sultant. Interested in Bantu Men’s Social Club. Address: 25a Becker St., Ferreirastown, Johannesburg. CASSAN, Peter Maurice, salesman; b. Sept. 13, 1922, P.E.; e. s. of P. M. Cassan, of Seymour, Cape; educ. St. Peters and Paterson High School, P.E.; m. y. d. of A. E. Jonathan (Iris). Bus.: Was associated with father’s bus., 1937-48; settled E.L., 1949; played football for Merchants F.C.; rep- resented Border F.A. 1952-56; treas. Swaraj Tennis Club since ath : : 1954; mem. Bluebells F.C. Rec: Sport. Address: 14 Walker Street, East London. CASSAN, Peter Mithal, gen. dlr.; b. June 16, 1887, Boda- lia, Surat, India; s. of Cassan Parshotam; educ. India; Business: estd. bus. at Seymour 1917; opened branch at Hertzog; during the Boer War was a post boy for Mahatma Gandhi; a leading businessman in the dist. & well respected by all sections of the community; visited In- dia 1912, 1948 & 1954. Add.: P. M. Cassan, Seymour, Cape Prov.

---

