# South African Indian Who's Who (1960)

**Book ID:** sa-indian-whos-who-1960-pt5
**Total Pages:** 19

---

## Page 1

104 THE SOUTH AFRICAN JOSHI, Pranshanker Someshwar, teacher, author and journalist; b. Jetpur, Saurashtra, India, Feb. 20, 1897; s. of |Someshwar Ranchhod Joshi; educ. Bombay Univ.; m. Vallabhkunvar, 3 d., 1 s. author of “Tyranny of Colour”, “Verdict on S.A.”, “Struggle for Equality”, “Apartheic in South Africa”, “Resurgent India” & others in English; “Rangdweshno Durga”, “Dakshin Africani Rangbhoomi”, “British Shahivadni Janjiro”, “Dakshin Africavasinan Smarano”, in Gujarati; Translations in Gujarati of “The Claim for Indepen- dence”, “India in World Politics’, “The Sleeper Awakened” and “Krishna’s Flute”, 1920-1942 Editor Gujarati Section of Indian Views; 1925-1939 Special rep. in S.A. for Hindustan Times, Bombay Chronicle and Searchlight; 1945-55 special rep. in S.A. for Indian Express, Madras; 1945-1950 editor Gujarati magazine, Prakash; a contributor to numerous news- papers in India, Africa and England. Public activities: Arrived in S.A. as an educated entrant under the Smuts-Ghandi Agreement of 1914; 1924-1926 exec. mem. S.A.I.C.; 1925-1932 pres. Sat-Sadhak Samaj; has served the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj in INDIAN WHO’S WHO various capacities, pres. 1947-1952, 1954-1956; pres. Yuvak Sanskar Parishad 1943; joint pres. mon- Europeans Authors’ Conference 1944; exec. mem. Johannesburg Planning Council for Non-European Social Welfare; 1956 mem. S.A. Centre of the P.E.N. Club; has lectured throughout S.A. on Indian culture, philosophy, history and religion. “Tyranny of Colour” was prescribed by the University for the Witwaters- rand as a reference book for the second year students of the Faculty of Social Studies. Rec.: Walking and cricket. Now in India. Address: 11 Jagnath Plot, Raj- kot, Saurashtra, India. JOSHUA, Jasper Llewellyn, dental sur- geon L.D.S., R.F.P.S. (Glasgow), specialis- ing in child dentistry; honours in biology at Anderson College of Medicine; first in 1st year dental surgery. Rec.: Golf, angling. Address: Bus., Sur- gery, Raydent Bldgs. No. 4, 1 Saville St., Durban, Phone 23857; res., 15 Len- nox Rd., Durban, Phone 37870. THE G. C. KAPITAN FAMILY KAPITAN, Gandabhai Chhagan, general dealer and restauranteur; b. Navsari, India, Dec. 9, 1893; e. s. of late Dayaram Bhugwan Kapitan; m. Ambaben, e. d. of Bhagwan Bhika of Gandevi, India; 1 s., 1 d.; educ. India. Estd. bus. as tailor in 1918, Pine St., Durban. In 1923 bought his brother’s bus., trading as G. C. Kapitan & Son. Pub. act.: Treas. Kilaphat Ashakhat Committee (1922); comm. mem. Surat Hindu Assoc.; vice-pres. Surat Hindu Educ. Soc. Takes keen interest in affairs of Ind. community. Address: 154 Grey St., Phone 22905, Durban, Natal. KAPITAN, Ambaben, housewife; b. Gandevi, India, 1901; e. d. of Bhagwan Bhika of Gandevi, India; m. Gandabhai Chhagan Kapitan; 1 s., 1 d. Assoc. with women’s activities in the city. KAPITAN, Dalpatram Gandabhai, general dealer and restauranteur; b. Durban, Feb. 17, 1924; 0. s. of G. C. Kapitan, of Durban; m. Rathanben, 2nd d. of Dayabhai Narsi, of Navsari, India; 2 s., 3 d.; educ. Hindu Tamil Institute, Durban. Kapitan & Son. Hobby: Photography. Address: 154 Grey St., Phone 22905, Durban, Natal. Partnered his father in business, trading as G. C. THE SOUTH AFRICAN KADER, Abdul; b. Cape Town, 1915; e. s. of Pye Narain Singh of Hospupur, Punjab, India; m. Habiba, e. d. of Hoosain Indad of Moradabad, 7 s., 2 d.; on leaving school est. own bus. at Wynberg, as soft drink manufacturer; in 1945, est. bus. known as National Mineral Water Manufacturer; also traded at Crawford and Athlone, under the style of A.K. Bazaars. Public activities: Was mem. of the Chamber of Industries, Cape Town; takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Sport. Address: Bona Vista, Church Street, Athlone, Cape Town. KADER, Hoosen, retired businessman; b. Durban, 1896; s. of Hajee Sheik Abdool; m. Imambi, 5 s., 3 d. educ. St. Oswalds School, Newcastle. Public activities: Com. of Oaths; patron N.D.1.F.A.; patron Dannhauser U.F. and C.S.; grantee, Dannhauser Indian School; trustee/c.man, School Trust v.p. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; trustee Dannhauser Islamic Society; trustee Islamic Cemetry. Rec.: Motoring. Address: P.O. Box 4, Dannhauser, Natal, Phone 14. KADAR, Shaik Das- tagir, watch repairer; b. 1905; 4th s. of late Abdur Kader of Dur- ban; educ. Junction Indian Sch.; m. Zohra Bee Bee, d. of late Hajee Abdulla, of May Street, Durban; 3s. 3 d.3 bus.: on leaving sch. interested himself in watch re- pairing and = was trained by a_ well known German tech- nician. Later earned a watch maker’s dip- loma. At present trading under the name of Practical Watchworks. Pub. Act. Mem. of the Anjuman Ikwatul Islam; takes an active part in S.A. Indian affairs. Interests: Islamic literature. Address: Bus., 201 Noor Chmbrs., 208 Grey St.; Res., 32 Wyndene Rd., Mayville, Durban. KAJEE, A. I. (Pty.), Ltd., Brokers; Airways and In- surance Agents; Manufacturers’ Representatives; Booking Agents for several Airline Companies, Add.: 37 Albert St., Durban; Box 1384; Phone 6-4551. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 105 KADWA, Mohamed Abdullah, director Hafes Stores (Pty.} Ltd.; b. Verulam, Feb. 2, 1931; s. of late M. A. Kadwa. Public activities: Treasurer Verulam ].F.A. 1955-56; treas. Verulam & District Indian Cricket Union 1954 « 58; delegate VIDI Grounds Assoc. 1957; vice- pres V. and D. LF.A. 1957; vice-pres. Club Goodwill; vice-pres. Kismet C.C.;_ vice- pres. Verulam F.C.; vice-pres. Verulam C.C.; capt. Kismet C.C. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 66 Wicks St., Verulam, Natal. ee KAJEE, I. Amod, M.B., Ch.B., med. practitioner; now practising at Estcourt. Add.: 120 Harding St., Estcourt, Natal. KAJEE, Ahmed Sadeck, merchant; b. Durban, 1904; educ. Indian Educational Institute and Higher Grade Sch., Durban; on father’s death in 1918 took charge of all business interests; opened on own account the West St. firm of Kajee Bros. in 1933. Public activi- ties: Vice-pres. of the N.I. Assoc.; rep. Natal at S.A. Indian Congress Con- ferences; trustee of Madressa Anjumar Islam, Durban; trustee of the Madressa Ronukal Islam of Kathor, India; chairman, Overport Muslim: Educational Trust; patron Muslim Youths’ Brigade; patron Oriental Angling Assoc.; vice-pres. Muslim: C.C.; chairman Overport Angling Club.. Address: 25 Browns Drift Rd., Durban North.

---

## Page 2

106 THE SOUTH AFRICAN KAJEE, Ahmed Sule- man; businessman; b. Dec. 10, 1918, at Stan- ger, Natal; s. of Sule- man Ebrahim Kajee; educ. Stanger Govt. Indian School; m. Amina, sec. d. of Mamoojee M. Motala, of Dannhauser; 4 s., 6 d. Business: Prop. of Kajee’s Timber & Fuel Supplies; Kajee’s Agencies; director of Stanger Builders’ and Hardware Supplies (Pty), Ltd.; associate prop. of imperial Garage & Filling Sta- tion; Stanger Motor Graveyard; Stanger Hardware Wholesalers; Planters’ Supply Store and S. E. Kajee & Sons. The firm of S. E. Kajee & Sons was first est. by his father in Ekutandaneni, Natal, and com- pleted in 1946. Agents for the Standard General Insurance Co. Ltd. and New India Assurance Co., Ltd.; agents for Buffalo Paints on the North Coast and distributors for Chrysler, Plymouth and Austin cars, and Fargo, Austin and Atkinson trucks; coffee and tea agent for J. Ellis Brown, Ltd. for Stanger, Greytown, Mapumulo and adjacent areas. Public activities: Ex-treas. N.I.O. (Stanger branch). Add.: Bus., Box 136; Res., Phones 36 and 161, Stanger. KAJEE, Essop Sule- man; director of com- panies; b. May 29, 1929, at Stanger; educ. Stanger Govt. Indian High School; diploma in bookkeeping and business methods; m. Hafez Bibi, sec. d. of Mrs. and the late Ma- homed Gangat, Mar- burg, Port Shepstone. Bus.: Entered business 1947 as partner in firm of S. E. Kajee & Sons,a Native trad- ing store near Tugela. In 1948 began firm Kajee’s Timber & Fuel Supplies, Stanger; together with E. S. and A. S. Kajee became director and prop. in the following concerns: Imperial Garage & Filling Station; Stanger Builders’ and Hardware Supplies (Pty), Ltd.; Stanger Motor Graveyard; Stanger Timber By-Products; Stanger Hardware Wholesalers; S. E. Kajee & Sons; Planters’ Supply Store. Local agents: The Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, Head Office Montreal, and all types of life and endowment insurance. Public activities: Hon. sec. Stanger Muslim Soc.; mem. Liberal Party of S.A.; mem. S.A. Inst. Race Rela- tions. Recreation: Tennis, table tennis, hiking. Club: Stanger Ind. Tennis Club. Add.: Bus. and Res., Box 156, Phone 36, 26 Couper St., Stanger, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO KAJEE, Mahomed Ahmed; b. Malvern, Ntl., June, 1899; educ. Higher Grade Govt. School and Ind. Edu- cational Institute, Dur- ban. Was organiser & treas. of the “Royal Visit Indian Reception Committee” celebra- tions on the occasion of the visit of His Majesty the late King George VI in 1947, and had the honour to be presented to the Royal Family. Was foundation exec. mem. of the Natal Indian Organisation. Is a trustee and exec. member of the Mahammedya Mosque, Sydenham. Is a patron of the Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, Mayville. Has tra- velled throughout South Africa, India, Mauritius, Madagascar, etc. In 1924 started Malvern Bazaars gen. dealer’s business at Malvern. In 1928 founded the firm of Kazi’s Agencies (Pty.), Ltd., manuf. repre- sentatives, distributors and merchants, of the Union (see advt page —-—). Address: P.O. Box 1798, 100 Queen Street, Durban; Phone 26071; Res., York Place, Sydenham, Durban; Phone 884547. KALIAN, Harilal, tailor; b. Kharsad, Surat, India, on Feb. 27, 1915; s. of Kalian Gopal; educ. in India; m. Gagaraben, d. of Parbhoo Fakir; 1 s., 2 d. Business: known as Standard Tailors, est. 1941. Came to S.A. in 1930 and settled in the Trans- vaal. Ex-com. mem. Shree Darjee Mandal, Tvl. Interested in music. Address: P.O. Box 5078, Boksburg North, Ph. 52-1941. KALIANJEE, Parbhoobhai; general dealer; b. Orna, Surat Dist., in 1912; s. of Kalian Hira; educ. in India; m. Nathiben, d. of Vallabh Ganga; 4 s., 5 d. Came to South Africa in 1924 and settled in the Transvaal. Business: Kalan Hira & Co., est. 1931. Sec. Boksburg Hindi Gujarati School; ex-pres. Transvaal Mayavant Mandal. Address: P.O. Box 5065, Boksburg North; Phone 52-2658. ~~ THE SOUTH AFRICAN KALIDAS, Nathoo- bhai Chohan, general i aha dealer; b. Bardoli, oe India, July 10, 1895, e. s. of late Kalidas Dhanjeebhai; educ, Siker Tulaba and Bardoli; m. Tapiben, d. of late Rajabhai Mitha, Bardoli, 1 s., 5 d. Came to S.A. in 1909, first settled in King w illiamstown, later went to Cape Town in 1913, where started own business; in 1923 settled in Simonstown opened business trading as Kalidas & Sons, Footwear and Drapers; visited India in 1914-1923-1930, Public activities: Interested in all public affairs; a generous donor to public appeals. Address: St. George's St., Simonstown, Phone 96259. K AL LICHURAN, Sooripal; b. Natal 1902; joined Natal Educ. Dept. 1918; appointed to Lady- smith Govt. Indian School. Public act: Was sec. K.R.D.I.F.A. 1919-21; sec. North- ern Natal Cricket Union 1926-28; founder Northern Natal Tennis Union 1934; was sec. and pres. Seigetown T.C, 1930-34; was pres. Ladysmith F.C. 1932- 34. Address: Govt. Indian School, Lady- smith, Box 59. KALLIE, Catherine, nurse; b. Dundee, Nov. 2, 1937; e. d. of E. D. Fred Kallie of Dundee; educ. Dundee Indian High School; nursing at the St. Aidan’s Hospital since 1954, Public activities: Mem. St. John’s Ambulance; takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Netball, music, dancing, pen pals. Address: Res., P.O. Box 29, Dundee, Phone 345. KALLIE, Fred, tailor; b. Maritzburg 1909; s. of B. Kallie; m. Maria, d. of Pienaar, 4 s., 2 d.; educ. York Rd., Pmburg. Came to Dundee 1929 and est. bus. of Kallie’s Tailors. Public activities: Played for Schools F.C. at Pmburg; founder Colonial F.C.; played for Dundee United F.C.; rep. N.D.LF.A. (inter-town); played cricket for Dundee U.C.C.; rep. N.D. in inter-town; keenly interested in sports and social work of the town. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 29 Wilson St.. Dundee. Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 107 KALLIDEEN, D., Clothing Mnfr.; b. Umbhlali, Natal, 25th Oct., 1908; educ. St. Aiden’s Boys Sch. Public Act.: Founda- tion mem. Dbn. Ind. Golf Club (1928); was Cap., V.-Pres. and V.- Captain of this club; was elected President 1945, held position for many years, now hon. life vice-pres.; He ac- complished the unique distinction of defeat- ing three Open Cham- pions in three con- secutive weeks, to win the Club Championship in 1947, and was dubbed by sportswriters as the “Champion of Champions”, a distinction indeed. Kalideen has won many competi- tions and some of these are: the Durban Indian Golf Club Championship, knockout, 1934; Kalideen Memorial Trophy, Medal, 1943; Sewduth’s Floating Trophy, Medal, 1945; tied for Ist place Coastal Open Championship, Medal, 1946; the Natal Open Cham- pionship, 1947; Club Championships, defeating three Open Champions in three consecutive weeks, knock- out, 1947; Inter-Club (teams of 4), 1948; Annie Lazarus Memorial Trophy, 1948: Inter-Club (team of 4), 1949; Club Champion, 1950; he has donated trophies to the following branches of sport: Athletics, Boxing (he was himself a keen amateur and Physical Culturist in his younger days), trained by Jock Stephens), Durban Indian Amateur Weight Lifting and Physical Culture Club and Soccer. The bodies who have benefited are: Light Weight Division, Natal Amateur Boxing Association, Dimes Football Asso- ciation, North Coast Indian Football Association, Durban Sunday Football Association (League), Dur- ban Indian Golf Club, Greenwood Park Tennis Club (Women’s Division, Club Championship), South African Amateur Athletic and Cycling Union. Add.: 7 High Grove, Durban North. KANDER, Patchappa Swaminathan, general mer- chant; b. Durban, Aug. 3, 1908; y. s. of Mr. T. Patchappa Kander; m. Valliammah, e. d. of late Mr. K. A. Govender of Verulam, 1 s.. 3 d.; educ. Durban Catholic School; joined his father’s general dealer’s business in 1938, now sole proprietor of P. S. Kander, General Merchant, stall Nos. 19-20, Indian Market, Durban. Public activities: Trustee, Natal Tamil Vedic Society; trustee Gandhi Sentamil School; patron of several sports bodies; contributor to Ghandi Ward at McCord’s Zulu Hospital; in- terested in sport and Ramakrishna Centre (Durban). Address: Bus., Stalls No. 19-20, Indian Market, Dur- ban, Natal, Phone 27669: Res., 23 Mitchell Rd., Durban, Phone 29080.

---

## Page 3

108 THE SOUTH AFRICAN KAMDAR, Hassim Noor Mohamed, photograph and com- mercial traveller; b. Pmburg, 1928, 3rd s. of N. M. Kamdar; educ, Richmond Sch. and Jumna Musjid, Durban; m. Rabia, d. of A. Amod of Stan- derton, 3 5s. was apprenticed to Dada’s Photograph Studio; took an active part in the photography club at the Inter- national Club, Dur- ban; in 1949 won the 2nd prize at an exhibition held at the Durban International Club; now specialises in child studies; was an official photographer for the Government during the popu- lation registration; also engaged in commercial travelling (for Osman’s spice works); mem. of the Iqbal study group. Rec.: Angling and films. Club: International Club. Address: Bus., 6 Ascot St., Durban. Phone 62293; res.. 5 May St., Durban, Phone 21321. KAPITAN, Choonilal Kesur; b. Navasari, Baroda, India, 1922, y. s. of S. J. Kapitan; educ. at Jhb; m. Hiraben, d. of Gopal Motiram of Bombay, 4d. 1 s. Came to S.A. in 1930; est. a business in India, later opened business in S.A. now trading as Kapitan Bazaar in Benoni. Public act.: Sec. S.A. Kshatrya Mundal Jhb. — sec. Yuvuk Mundal Nava- sari; sec. Gujerati Seva Samaj, treasurer Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha. Address: 41 3rd Ave., Benoni, Phone 3869. KASSAN, Govind, shoe trader; b. Bulsar Dist., Surat, 1903; s. of Kassan Chiba; educ. India and Cape Town: m. Divali Ben, d of Wallabh Lalla, Bombay, 1s. 3 d. Arrived in S.A, at the age of 14; was assoc. with father’s business, later est. business, trading under the style of Oriental Shoe Shops. Public activities: Mem. of the Hindu Mochee Maha Sabha; mem. of Moche Soc., Cape Town; mem. of other Hindu organisations; was a mem. of the Bharat C.C. Rec.: Cricket. Address: 75 Kloof St., Cape Town, Phone 32631. INDIAN WHO’S WHO KAROLIA, Hassen Adam; b. Alipur, Dist. Surat, India; s. of Adam Ebrahim; educ. at Alipur, India; m. Fatima, d. of Moosa ce Karola; 1 s., 3 d. Joined father’s busi- ness in 1914; firm known as Adam Ebra- him & Son (Pty.), Ltd., in Jeppe, Johan- nesburg. Mem. Alipur Muslim Trust Fund; Karolia Muslim Jam- ath; T. Muslim League; official, Eastern Trades Assoc., Jeppestown; mem. T.I. Organisa- tion. Visited Mecca twice. Address: Res., 51a McIntire St., Phone 24-2929, Jeppe. Johannesburg. KATHRADA, Sule- man Amod; managing director of Kathrada Bros. (Pty.), Ltd. (for- merly Kathrada Bros.); b. May 6, 1924; ec. s. of Amod Suleman Kathrada; educ. matric, Sastri College, Durban; m. d. of S. E. Seedat, of Newcastle; 2 s., 1 d. Business: Wholesale merchants and = im- porters, Interested in all sports and matters affecting the Indian community. Club: Ozone Club. Address: Business. 50 Queen Street; Res., 306 Cowey Road, Durban. KATHREE, Mahomed Ebrahim, dealer in radio and radio en- gineering; b. Caven- dish, Natal; 2nd s. of Ebrahim Lallajee Kathree; m. e. d. of Cc. [. Limbada, of - Cavendish; educated Higher Grade Govt. Sch., Durban. Has the largest sound equip- ment for public address service; does radio repairs of all descriptions; has the largest non-European radio workshop in S.A.; his sound equip- ment was used at Currie’s Fountain during the Royal Visit in 1947. Interested in all progressive community THE SOUTH AFRICAN movements. Recreation: Fishing. Club: Orient Fish- ing Club. Address: Bus., 23a Queen St.; Res., 130 First Avenue, Durban. 30471. KESHAVJEE, Goolam Manijee, director of com- panies; b. at Pretoria; s. of M. Keshavjee; educ. at Ferguson Coloured School; m. in 1923, 3 d., one being Dr. D. G. Keshavjee; bus, dir. of G. M. Keshavjee (Pty.) Ltd., Dominion Theatre (Pty.) Ltd., Goolam Theatre (Pty.) Ltd., Chotilal Investments (Pty.) Ltd., Manjee Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Pres. of H.H. the Aga Khan’s Council of S.A.; was a member of the Aga Khan’s 88th Birthday Celebra- tion Comm; attended the Ismailia Conferences at Cairo, France and East Africa regularly. Rec.: Soccer. Address: P.O. Box 1674, Pretoria, Phone KESHAVJEE, Habib V., director of companies; b. Pretoria 1909; educ. Ferguson School; bus. director of Empire Theatre and several other companies. Public activities: Mem. of Race Relations Institute; was hon. sec. H.H. The Aga Khan’s Education Board and Welfare Society; editor of “The Aga Khan and Africa”; Mem. Ismaili Sporting Club. Address: 522 Boom St., Pretoria. KESHAVJEE, Hassim Manjee, wholesale merchant; b. Pretoria, Aug. 2, 1909; educ. Ferguson School; was assoc. with family bus.; director of M. Keshav- jee & Co. (Est. 1902) and Chotila Investments (Pty.) Ltd., Manjee Investments (Pty.) Ltd., Dominion Theatres, Alex Investments. Public activities: Life pres. Pretoria Muslim T.C.; holds numerous adminis- trative positions in public life. Address: 99 Prinsloo St., Pretoria; T.A.; “Manjee”, Pretoria. KHALFE, Ahmed Ismail, social worker; b. Latvan, Ratnagiri, India, 1921; educ. Dhapoli (India) and Cape Town; m., 4 s., 2 d.: Inherited bus. from father. Public activities: Treasurer Latvan and Dabut Educ. and General Improvement Society; exec. mem. Indian Trades <Assoc.; ex- treas. & exec. mem. Orient Sport Club, C.T.; exec. mem. Dhapoli Educ. Soc., C.T.; mem. Azad Study Group; foundation mem. Himayatul Islam Society; raised funds for building Kockney Muslim Comm. and free library building, Nairobi; takes a keen interest in sports and social affairs. Rec.: Cricket and soccer. Address: 130 Kloof St., Cape Town, Phone 20907. D2 INDIAN WHO’S WHO 109 KESHAVJEE, Nazrali, merchant; b. Pretoria 1911; educ. Ferguson Sch.; est. business in 1947, trading as Manbro (Pty.) Ltd.; co-director Alex Investments (Pty.) Ltd., Chotila Investments, Dominion Theatres, Manjee Investments (Pty.) Ltd.; mem. Aga Khan’s Council for S.A.; served on the Educational Board. Address: 274 5th St., Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. KHALFE, Goolam Hoosain Bawa, merchant; b. Tieda, dist. Ratnagiri, India 1917, s. of B. G. Khalfe; educ. India and Cape Town; m., 1 s., 3 d. Arrived in S.A. in 1942; est. own business, trading under the name of B. Goolam & Sons; visited India in 1956, also travelled in East Africa. Public activities: Interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Sports. Address: 13 Jordan St., Cape Town, Phone 28442. KHALFE, Ismail Bawa, merchant; b. Latvan, Rat- nagiri, India 1885, s. of B. Khalfe; educ. Latvan, India; m. Abida, d. of Oopadeh, 1 s., 1 d. Arrived in S.A. 1902; formerly in private employment, later est. bus. trading as Bawa & Co; visited India several times. Public activities; Mem. Latvan debat- ing soc; trustee of Habibia Moslem, Educ. Inst. Address: 130 Kloof St., Cape Town, Phone 20907. KHAN, Abdulia, businessman; b. March 8, 1918, Overport, Durban; s. of Madar Khan; ed. St. Aidan’s, St. Anthony’s, Higher Grade Schools, Dur- ban; m. Amina Bee Bee. 2nd d. of Noor Mahomed, Overport, Natal; 3 s., 3 d. Busi- ness: City Stores, est. 1953, spec. musical instr., records, cycle repairs, school books; previously had general dealer’s known as 4 Royal Stores & At- lantic Fisheries. Public activities: Commissioner of Oaths, Durban Dist.; trustee and sec. Mohammedeya Musjid, Overport: com. mem. Natal Muslim Council; pres. Queen’s F.C. and Crimson C.C.; patron and del. D.I. Sports Ground Assoc.; patron N.LC.U., D.ILF.C. and D.LC.U.; mem. F.O.S.A. Sydenham Care Committee; exec mem. Buzmi Ikhwanus Saffa (Muslim Brother- hood Union). Recreation: Fishing, religious and social work; pres. Ocean Angling Club; vice-pres. Coastal Angling Assoc.; patron D. & D. Angling Assoc.; presented Ishmail Khan Memorial Shield to Durban and Dist. Angling Club. Address: Bus., Phone 62858, Box 2170, 129 Queen St., Durban, Telegraphic “Whitecity”; Res., Phone Extn. Flat 8, 129 Queen St., Durban. dese een

---

## Page 4

110 THE SOUTH AFRICAN KHAN, Ahmed Mohamed, staff, mem. Missions to Seamen; b. Durban, June 24, 1924, e. s. of M. C. Khan of Durban; m. d. of N. M. Soobratee of Candella Rd., Durban, 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Umgeni Govt. School; was in the employment of Oxford Outfitters; later assoc. with the Missions to Seamen in 1942. Public activities: Takes keen interest in the affairs of the non-European people. Rec.: Cricket. Address: 33 West End House, Grey St., Durban. KHAN, Dawood Ally, medical student; b. Cape Town, 1938, s. of H. A. Khan; educ. Harold Cressey High School; later studied at Cape Town University. Public activities: Sec. Jhangir C.C.; sec. Unity movement; sec. Harold Cressey Cultural Soc.; sec. St. John Ambulance Brigade for six years. Rec.: Cricket and table tennis. Address: 34 Hasting St., Tamboers Kloof, Cape Town, Phone 22435. KHAN, Goolam Rassol, merchant; 2nd s. of Rehman Khan of Bombay; b. Bombay, Dec. 10, 1915; m. Amina, y. d. of Kajee Peerbhai of Cape Town, | s., 6 d.; educ. Ladysmith and Sastri College; est. Riverside Cash Store in 1936 and 1944, Khan’s Store. Public activities: Was treas., now life vice- pres. Riverside Parents’ Assoc.; coun- cillor, Riverside In- dian Ratepayers’ Assoc.; sec. Riverside Muslim Soc.; official of North Coast Indian sports ground assoc.; patron North Coast Cricket Union; vice-pres.. Randeree Mehfile-Ikhlass. Rec.: Interested in sport, especially cricket and soccer. Address: Bus., 302 Riverside Rd., Phone 834202; Res., 37 Brookes Rd., Durban North. KHAN, Hajee Ally, merchant; b. in 1885, Tudil, Dist. Kolaba, India, s. of M. Khan; educ. in India; m. Hajee Rabia, d. of Dawood Khan, 4 s., 4 d. On arrival in S.A. 1902, was in private employment, later est. own bus., trading as Ally Khan; opened a branch store in 1934, now trading as Ally Khan & Sons (Pty.) Ltd; visited Mecca with wife in 1954, Public activities: Was treas. of NU-RIL Islam Mosque in Salt River; takes an active part in all Muslim activities. Address: 34 Hasting St., Tamboers Kloof, Cape Town, Phone 22435; also at 189 Victoria Road, Woodstock, Cape Town. INDIAN WHO’S WHO KHAN, Hajee Gulzar; b. Panhalje, Dist. Ratnagiri, India 1927, s. of Misri Khan; educ. Elphin- ston College, India, Bombay University; teacher at Habibiya School Technical College section; teacher in maths and English, also Urdu; conducts _ private classes in the after- noons. Public activi- ties: Hon. life vice- pres. W.P.LC.U.; vice- pres. Orient Muslim sports club; mem. Orient C.C.; was a mem. of Elphinston football team in India; foundation mem. O.F.C.; founder of the magazine “AL-HABIB”, published in English and Urdu; made a study tour of the Middle East and Egypt; also visited the Continent, England, Pakistan and India. Rec.: Cricket and football. Address: Teachers’ Quarters, Johnston Rd., Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 691688. KHAN, Hajee Rehi- man Moheedien, mer- chant; b. Khed, Rat- nagiri, India 1919, e. s. of Moheedien Khan; — educ. Salt River, Cape Town; m. Amina, d. of I Khan, 2 d. Came to S.A. in 1927; joined father’s bus. trading as Goulburn Bazaar; est. a branch at 24 Maitland Rd., Salt River. Public activi- ties: Chairman of Elsies River Muslim Educ. Soc., Eastern Muslim Sport Club; trustee of Noorul-Islam Mosque, Salt River; mem. Habibiya Educ. Inst., Kloobool-Momineen Mosque Comm. of Goodwood; patron of Goulburn United Sport Club, Muslim Educ. Soc. of Goodwood; vice- chair. of Joint Council of Elsies River (non-Euro- peans); sec. of Khed Moslem Comm.; also a welfare worker of the Northern Suburbs of Cape Town. Rec.: Cricket. Address: Bus and Res., 131 Goulburn Rd., Goodwood, Cape Town, Phone 986914. THE SOUTH AFRICAN KHAN, Hamid Noor- mahomed, est. agent; b. Durban 1913, e. s. of late C. N. M. Khan of Durban, 6 d., 1 s.3 taught at May Street Madressa School, later became Principal; left teach- ing profession to open Estate Agency. Public activities: Was founder and principal of May Street Mad- ressa; foundation mem. of Sastri Col- lege Old Boys’ Club, now holds position as pres.; pres. of the Greyville C.C.; mem. of the Anjuman Esha-A-Tul; was selected for inter-town soccer 1935; Islam and Jamat May Street Masjied; rep. Sastri College at football, cricket and athletics. Rec.: Angling, swim- ming and sport. Address: Bus., 83a Victoria St., Durban, Phone 28206; res., 104 Woodford Grove, Durban. KHAN, Hassan Ahmed; b. Khed, Ratnagiri, 1923, o. s. of late A. Khan; educ. Bombay and Ismail Yusuf College, India; on death of father, returned to S.A. to take over family business; pur- sued his studies, whilst in business; later returned to India to complete his studies at the Cal- cutta University. Public activities: Was a mem. of the In- dian Traders Assoc., Cape Town. Rec.: Sports and reading. Address: 79b Chittaramjan Ave., Cacultta 12, India; also 32 Foundry Rd., Salt River, Cape Town, Phone 51714. KHAN, Ismail, salesman; b. Tudil, Bombay 1910, s. of Dawood Khan; educ. Mafeking; 1 s. 1 d.; after period of private employment in Mafeking, sailed for India in 1929; on return in 1933, est. general dealers bus. in Cape Town; from 1946, represents several European firms as salesman. Public activities: Mem. of the Habibiya Educ. Inst.; mem. of the Moslem Hospital Welfare Soc; exec. mem. of the Amalgamated Sports Board; mem. of the Northern Areas Maternity and Welfare Soc.; rep. Cape Indians at S.A.LC. 1943 and 1946; rep. Eastern United Tennis Club; was sec. for 5 years INDIAN WHO'S WHO lif Kooloobul Mosque, Goodwood, Cape Town, at present holds position of trustee; responsible for the expansion of the Mosque. Rec.: Cricket and tennis. Address. 220 Voortrekker Rd., Wasco, Cape Town, Phone 989574. KHAN, Himdad, sec- retary of companies, administrator of ests., bookkeeper; ss. of Subedar Khan; b. in Jhb., Dec. 25, 1898; educ. Good Shepherd Sch., Pretoria, and private study; m. Jai- toon, d. o. I. Abdool Rahman, of Benoni; 2 s., 2 d. Started own business in 1935 after a period of partner- ship with the firm of Mustapha Hussain, company secretaries & bookkeepers. Pub- . lic activities: Ex-treas. T.I. Football Assoc.; vice-pres. W.I. Football Assoc.; treas, S.A.].F. Assoc.; pres. T.J. Lawn Tennis Assoc. (1935-1943); pres. S.A.I. Lawn Tennis Assoc.; hon. life vice-pres. S.A.I.L.T. Assoc. and T.J.L. Tennis Assoc.; est. Rangers Tennis and Football Clubs; trustee, Johannesburg Indian Sports Grounds Assoc. Address: Bus., 55 Delarey St., Vrededorp, Transvaal, Phone 35-1579, Johannesburg. KHAN, Mahmood Ally, merchant; b. Cape Town, s. of H. A. Khan; educ, Tudil High School; m., 1 s,; joined father’s bus., later appointed director of the firm Ally Khan & Sons (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Interested in religious work, also a social worker. Interests: Reading. Address: 34 Hasting St., Tam-~ boers Kloof, Cape Town, Phone 22435. KHAN, Mahomed Ally, merchant; b. Cape Town, 1926, s. of Hajee Ally Khan; educ. Dhapoli, India; m., | s.; matriculated in India, came to South Africa and joined father’s bus., later became director, trading under the name Ally Khan & Sons (Pty.) Ltd. Public activities: Takes a keen interest in religious work and in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Reading. Address: Bus., 189 Vic- toria Rd., Phone 53502; res., 34 Hasting St., Tam- boers Kloof, Cape Town, Phone 22435, KHAN, S.A., hairdresser; b. Natal; educ. St. Theresas Govt.-aided Indian School and Congress High School;. est. hairdressers’ bus., trading as Red Circle Select Hairdressers at 282 Jan Smuts Highway, Mayville,. Natal. Public activities: Mem. N.I.C. Youth Congress;: Westridge Social Club; keen soccerite; mem. Randles. F.C.; mem. Pyramid Musical Club (vocalist); also: a land and estate agent; toured S.A. 1947-50. Rec.: Soccer. Address: 51 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban.

---

## Page 5

112 THE SOUTH AFRICAN KHARWA, Mahomed Ismail, merchant; b. Lady- smith, March 24, 1911, s. of Hajee Ismail Kharwa; educ. Ladysmith Govt. Indian School, now known as Windsor High School; m., 4 s., 1 d.; entered bus. in 1939; when firm was registered as Co. Ltd., became one of the directors. Public activities: Played cricket and football for Ottoman’s Football and Cricket Club and tennis for Siegetown Tennis Club; later played football and was a foundation mem. of the Stars Football Club; rep. Northern Districts Indian Cricket Union in inter-town matches against Durban and Maritzburg; rep. Siegetown Tennis Club in tournaments. Interests: Reading and gardening. Address: Bus., 224/228 Murchison St., Ladysmith, Phone 336; res., 49 Murchison St., Phone 376. KHATRI, Jamnadas Ambaram, tailor; s. 0. Ambaram Bhagvan; b. Navsari, India; educ. Vernacular H.S., Navsari, India; passed matric in Gujerati; m. Narbada, 6 s., 4 d.; after her death m. Kanchun. _ Began tailoring in 1922. Ex- sec. Transvaal Kshatri Mundal; mem. Be- spoke Tailoring In- dustry; T. Hindu Seva Samaj; T. Ind. Con- gress; ex-mem. Stella F.C. Address: 179a Market St., Jhb. KIKIA, Goolam Hoosen; b. Dundee, March 24, 1934, y. s. of late Mohammed Kikia; educ. Dundee Govt. Ind. High Sch.; took up nursing at the Eden- dale Non-European Hospital in 1956. Public act.: Interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Rec.: Cinema, tennis. Address; Edendale Non-Euro- pean Hospital; res., 42 Smith St., Dundee, Natal. KISSOON, Singh Jaichand, B.A., Attorney practising at 307 Lakhani Chambers, 2 Saville Street, Durban. KISTENSAMY, Veerasamy Banga- ramar; educ. Metho- dist Indian School, Pmburg; m. Willy Kistensamy, o. s. of Mr. Lutchman K. of Durban, 4 s., 2 d; bus. est. 1886 by late father, after leaving school assisted with the bus.; est. own bus. 1928 trading as Veerasamy’s Laun- dry, now operating as Pioneer Steam Laundry. Public activities: Was mem. Pmburg. Women’s Assoc.; a keen social worker and especially interested INDIAN WHO’S WHO in religious work; provides a free laundry service for the Aryan Benevolent Home, Pmburg. Rec.: Sewing and gardening. Address: 48 Pietermaritz St., Pietermaritzburg. KOLIA, Essop Ismail, general merchant; b. Harden Heights 1903, 2nd s. of late Hajee Ismail Essopjee- Kolia of Howick; m., 3 s., 7 d.; educ. Stanger Indian School; joined his father in business at Harden Heights, now sole prop. of Kolia & Co. in Howick. Public activities: Mem. of Howick Muslim League, and takes keen interest in Indian community. Address: Main St., P.O. Box 24, Howick, Natal, Phone 63. KONDIAH, Sambee- sivan (Bobby); b. Pentrich; _ educ, E.P.S. School; =m. Rathnavathie, d. of Mr. Veeraama_ of Durban, 1 d.; shop steward 1952-53; in- terested in scouting since 1938; promoted Dist. Scoutmaster 1952; qualified for Wood Badge 1947; one of the founders Pentrich Scout Group; was sec. Springbok F.C. 1952-53, later chair; Fosa_ clerk 1949; chair. delegate to Working Comm., Durban; comm. mem, Pentrich Ratepayers’ Assoc. 1951-52; founder and chair. Pentrich Angling Club 1957; mem. S.A. Red Cross Soc. Address: 104 Campsdrift Rd., Pentrich, Pieter- maritzburg. KOOBAIR, A. J., retired legal clerk and Commis- sioner of Oaths; b. Durban 1885, s. of late Agnoo; educ. High Grade Govt.-aided Indian School. Public activities: Was a mem. of the N.I.C.; councillor of the S.A.H.M.S.; official of the Durban Hindu Temple and the Shri Rayaman Sabha; mem. of the N.I.O.; official of the Ward 6 Ratepayers’ Assoc. Address: 77 Essendene Rd., Sydenham, Durban. KOOVARJEE, Cheganlal Damodar, merchant; b. Estcourt, August, 1912, s. of Damodar Koovarjee; educ. Estcourt Govt. Indian School; m. Dhanu, d. of Nathubhai Parchotam, 3 s.; bus. est. by father in 1908; in 1932 traded as Tailor & Gent’s Out- fitters. Public activities: Foundation mem. of the Estcourt Indian T.C.; hon. treas. W.C.IL.F.A. 1953- 54; foundation mem. Veda Dharma Sabha and was its pres. for several years, V.D.S. was responsible for obtaining Indian ward at the Estcourt Sanatorium; keenly interested in the public life of the Indian community. Played soccer for Royals F.C. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 135, Phone 135; res., 201 Albert St., Estcourt, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN KRISHNAN, Govin- dasamy, b. Estcourt, Natal, 1901; educ. Pretoria and S.M.H. High School, Shiyali, Tanjore; left school in response to Mahatma Gandhi's call of non- Co-operation move- ment and did pro- paganda work; en- gaged in business and is also a teacher in Tamil at the Pretoria Tamil School. Public activities: Asst. secty. of the Shiyali Taluk Congress in 1921; delegate to All-India National Congress at Ahmedabad; delegate to the Madras Provincial Conferences at Tanjore and Trichy and district conferences at Kumba-Konam, Tanjore, Manaargudi and Negapatam; returned to South Africa in 1926 and elected secty. of the Tamil Mahajana Sastri Reception Comm. in 1926; secty. Pretoria Tamil Vedic School Redemption Comm. in 1927; secty. Panchayat for the Siva Soobramanya Temple in 1928; secty., comm. for the Stand Holdesr’ Assn, in 1929; secty. Sarojini Reception Comm.; one of the joint sectys. in 1927-30 and chairman in 1930-34 of the Pretoria Tamil Vedic Young Men’s Assn.; 1930, chairman for the Pretoria Youth Comrade League; 1931-35, secty. Pretoria Tamil League; 1931, comm. mem. of Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; 1934, Scout Master of the Pretoria Indian Boy Scouts; awarded the Tamil Vedic Young Men's Assn.’s gold medal for invaluable service; comm. mem. T.I.C. (Pretoria branch). Address: 324 Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria, Transvaal. LAKHI, Abdul Kadir, company director and C.O.; e. s. late M. E. Lakhi; b, Greytown, 1914: 2 s., 3 d. Bus.: Trading under the style of Melgrey Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd. Mem. N.I.O. Recreation: Angling and cine photography. Address: 21 Bell St., Greytown, Natal, P.O. Box 164. LALLA, Dhanilall Doorga, company secretary; b. May 1[5, 1908, at Overport, Dbn.; s. of Doorga Lalla; educ. Higher Grade Sch., Dbn.; m. only d. of Mr. Moo- loo, of Pretoria; 2 s., 1d. Business: Sec. Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assoc. Pres. Stanger Indian Child Welfare Soc. for 10 years; pres. Lower Tugela Dist. Ind. F.C. for 10 years; pres. Lower Tugela Dist. Indian Cricket Assoc.; sec. Stanger Ind. Educ. Board; Stanger Ind. Rate- INDIAN WHO’S WHO 113 payers’ Assoc.; Indian Servicemen’s Club, Durban; Central Cinema, Ltd.; Stanger Crematorium Com.; Gledhow Mill Group; New Guelderland Mill Group and New Guelderland Mill Board; Melville, Glen- dale and Doornkop Groups; ex-sec. Natal Indian Congress and Association; helped to form the Stanger Literary and Debating Society. Recreation: Fishing and reading. Address: Bus., Box 79; Res., Corner Sea View and Hill Crescent Roads. Stanger, Natal. — LAHER, Ismail Fakir, merchant; b. Alipur, India; s. o. F. S. Laher; educ. Govt. Indian School, Jhb.; estd. bus. in 1915; trading under own name as whole- sale and retail merchant; opened branch store at 2 Cleveland Rd., Cleveland; was treas. Muslim League; went on pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina, 1946; was accompanied by his wife on this trip; mem. Orient Club. Address: Res., 54 End St., Phone 221571, Box 331, Johannesburg. ee LALLA, P., general dealer and fresh prod. dealer; b. Bheray, In- dia; s. of Lalla Gogi; m. Dahiben. Came to S.A. in 1905, and settled in the Trans- vaal. Business: P. \ Lalla & Sons, est. in 1938. One of the founders of Shree Kamrey Talocka Mayavant Sudharah Mandal. Address: 53a Voortrekker Street, Heidelburg, Tvl. Ph. 255, LALLOO, Chuggen, tailor; b. Newcastle, Jan., 19, 1924; s. o. Lalloo Vanmalli; m. Mangavri, d. 0. Moti- ram Bhagwan; 2 s.; educ. Dundee Govt. Indian Sch.; prop. of Modern Tailors; Public activities: com. mem. Dundee Hindu Temple; com. mem. Dundee Indian Musical Soc.; vice-pres. Young Swingsters Orch.; ex-joint secty. Dundee and District Indian Child Wel- fare Soc.; at present com. mem. of above; pres. Dun- dee and District Indian Tennis Club. Recreation: Tennis and reading. Address: Bus., 61 Wilson St.; res., 27 Bulwer St., Dundee, Phone 313.

---

## Page 6

114 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 2 THE K. LALLOO FAMILY & LALLOO, K., Commissioner of Oaths, cartage contractor; »b. Pietermaritzburg Oct, 11, 1908; 4th s. of Khedu of Merebank; m. Jesodah, 2nd d. of late G. H. Dass, former principal of Avoca Ind. Sch.; 2 s., 4 d.; educ. Clair- wood Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. Was one of the first teachers at the Merebank Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. in 1925-26. Pub. act.: Pres. N.C. (Merebank Branch) 1943-51; chairman Fosa, 1943-51; life vice-pres. Merebank Ind. Assoc.; treas. and vice-pres. Mere- bank Ind. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; chairman Ind, Child Welfare Soc. (Merebank Branch); trus. Mere- bank Sanathan Dharma Woona- thee Sabha; vice-pres. Isipingo Ind. Soc.; vice-pres. Sri Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal); grantee Sanathan Govt.-aided Ind, Sch. (Durban); vice-pres. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha; life mem. Springfield Hindu Sabha; life mem. Shall- cross Educational Committee; life mem. Hindu Siksha Sangh of S.A.; vice-pres. Budree Place Yuvuk Sabha; patron: Merebank Ind. Parents’ Assn.; patron: Brighton C.C.; patron: Merebank F.C.; life mem. Overseas Medical Students’ Assn. (Bombay); Trust. and vice- pres. Merebank Literary and Debating Society; laid foundation stone of Reunion Bhajan Mundal, of which he is life mem.; opened Shall- cross Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; visited E. Africa twice and toured India extensively including Pakistan, Sychelles Islands, Goa, East Asia, Kenya; met leading personalities in India. Add.: Bus., 13 Navy Rd., Merebank, Natal; P.O. Box 6, Phone 87650. Res., 140 Beach Rd., Merebank, Natal. LALLOO, Jasodah, housewife, social worker; b. Avoca, 1912; 2nd d. of late G. H. Dass of Avoca; m. K. Lalloo; 2 s., 4 d.; educ. privately. Pub. act.: Patron Mere- bank Ind. Women’s League; patron Merebank Ind. Women’s Group; life mem, Isipingo Ind. Soc.; life mem. Hindi Siksha Sangh of S.A. Takes keen interest in all affairs affecting the Ind. community. LALLOO, Savithree, social worker; b. Avoca, March 18, 1937; d. of K. Lalloo; educ. Merebank Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and Durban Ind. Girls’ High Sch. Pub. act.: Sec. Merebank Ind. Girls’ Club; mem, Ind. Child Welfare Soc. (Merebank Branch). Interested in social welfare activi- ties. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 115 LATIB, Hajee Noor Mohamed Hajee Osman, fishing tackle and model aeroplane dir.; b. Duvav, India, Dec., 1913; 2nd s. 0. Hajee Osman Latib of Johannesburg; educ. Rajkot, India; m. Zubeda, d. o. Hajee Vally Mahomed; 1 s., 6d.; estd. Rand Cycle Works in 1937 and later estd. bus. known as “The Anglers Den” & Jeep Sports Goods Mfg. (Pty.) Ltd., the Trans-Union — Electri- cal Distributors and Olympic Sports; keenly interested in the Memon Wel- fare Soc. and other Indian social, sporting and religious bodies. Interests: Fishing, model aeroplanes and model trams. Address: Bus., 58 Commissioner St., Johannesburg, P.O. Box 10488, Phone 330485. LAWRENCE, Syl- vester Mary, A.T.C.L., L.L.C.M., vice-prin.; b. Dbn., Natal; 2nd d. o. V. Lawrence of Durban; educ. _ St. Philomena’s School. Teachers’ Professional Exam. T3 Ext. Cert. (1949) A.T.C.L. (violin, 1931); L.L.- C.M. (piano, 1925); gold medallist at Eisteddfod; appointed vice-prin. of Clair- wood Govt. Indian Girls’ School in 1946. Public activities: Com. VAD. 117 (Red Cross Nursing Division), pioneer detachment; gold medal for First Aid and for Home Nursing; King’s Medal for Voluntary Service; 20-year Award for Red Cross service; S.A. War Medal; secty./treas. of Indian Women’s Assn.; mem. National Council of Women’s Educ. Comm.; mem. N.LT.S.; chairman Schools’ Music Festival; Chairman Indian Eisteddfod (Clair- wood branch); pres. Catholic Teachers’ Assn.; exec. mem. B.LC.A. (art group) and Indian Women’s Liter- acy Assn.; keenly interested in all social and educ. activities; made extensive tour of United Kingdom and European continent, Ceylon and India during 1955-56. Hobby: Painting. Club: Durban Interna- tional Club (foundation member). Address: 63 Gale St.. Phone 61667, Durban, Natal. LAWERENCE, Rita, music teacher, A.T.C.L. and A.T.C.M.; b. Cape Town, March 19, 1932; d. 0. A. B. Lawerence; educ, Zonnebloem Trading College, Con- vent of the Holy Cross; commenced music lessons at the age of 7 at the Convent; awarded first prize at the Eisteddfod at the age of 10; completed teachers course at the age of 16; awarded special certificate of merit for passing all examinations in theory; obtained the highest marks in the Cape Province for Teachers’ Diploma in music; teaches at St. Theresa’s School, Wesley St., Cape Town, and at the Academy of Art and Music, Cape Town and privately at home; has reputation of “no failures” in music exams; one Henry King is now official organist of St. Mark’s Church, Cape Town; organiser of the Drama Section of the Youth Club in Cape Town; has taken part in many plays; was bus. director for the production of a religious play held in Cape Town in 1957; mem. of the Catholic Teachers’ Organisation; was pres. of the Young Ladies’ soc. of the Church; mem. of the Catholic Women’s League, and Teachers’ League of S.A.; organiser of film shows for charity; has pen- pals in almost all countries in the world; collector of long playing records in jazz and classical records. Recreation: Swimming and softball. Address: 25 Eden Rd., Woodstock, Cape Town. LAWRENCE, ‘Vin- cent, commissioner of oaths; b. Madras, 1872; was Mahatma Gandhi's private sec.; served with him in Anglo - Boer War; gained Queen’s Medal for _ service with Natal Indian Volunteer Ambulance Corps; trus. Motala Lads Boys’ Hostel; patron and _ trus. Natal Indian Blind Soc.; chairman Brd. of Trustees Natal In- dian Congress Pro- perties; trus. M. L. Sultan Charitable and Educational Trust; member F.O.S.A.; was associated with late Rev. Satchell, the founder; was honorary secretary Sir Marshall Campbell’s Indian Reception in City Hall, on the occasion of his knighthood; mem. N.U.C. Council for non-European Affairs; mem. Penal Reform League; mem. Social Services of S.A. and United Council of Social Agencies; was comm. mem. of Dur- ban Prisoners’ Aid Assn.; was mem. King Edward VIII Hospital Advisory Board; was vice-pres. Durban Indian Hospital Advisory Assn.; was exec. mem. Coloured and Indian Juvenile Affairs Board; was hon. secty. Parsee Rustomjee Hall and M. K. Gandhi Library comm; was hon. treas. Bai Jerbhai Rustom- jee Catholic Indian Boys’ Orphanage; led deputation of Indian Catholics for late Rt. Rev. Bishop C. Jolivet’s Triple Jubilee, presented him with an illumin- ated address; was vice-chairman Indian Reception Comm. for visit of Royal Family; recipient of King

---

## Page 7

116 THE SOUTH AFRICAN George VI Coronation Medal with a letter from His Majesty; mem. of Civilian Protective Services; received letter of thanks from Field-Marshal Smuts and Mayor and City Councillors of Durban; awarded medal for S.A. war services; was pres. of Ind. Ex Servicemens League; comm. mem. Ind. Cen- tenery Celebration Comm.; acted as chairman for N.LC. visit of late Sarojini Naidu; was vice-chairman Ind. European Joint Council and Catholic Ind. Young Men’s Sor. Address: 63 Gale St., Durban, Natal. LAZARUS, Arthur Dawson, B.A. (S.A.). M.A. (Yale); princi- pal; b. Durban, Jan. 14, 1903; e. s. of D. Lazarus, of Dann- hauser; educ. S.A. N.C. Fort Hare, matriculated 1927, graduated 1930; T.2. Natal Educ. Dept., 1934; being the first Indian to be awarded the Carnegie Fellow- ship for 1937, to do post-graduate work in the Dept. of Race Re- lations of the grad. Sch. of Yale Univ., New Haven. Connecticut, U.S.A.; while there worked in the Department of Education also, in which Department he was awarded the M.A. degree in 1939; title of thesis presented: “Racial Determinants of an Immigrant Group — A study of the Indian in South Africa”; attended a Seminar Conference held under the joint auspices of Yale University and the University of North Carolina at the latter University, where he made contact with Negro problems in the Southern States; travelled extensively in the United States; studied social and political problems of minority groups in the University of Puerto Rico; travelled in the Dominican Republic and Haiti where he studied similar problems; visited England and France, 1938; senior Latin master of Sastri College, Durban, since 1931; became first Indian principal of Sastri College, 1951. Public activities: Pres. N.LT.S. 1939-40, 1950-57; also hon. general sec. for several years; exec. mem. of the Indo-European Joint Coun- cil 1934-35; chairman of the St. Aidan’s Young Men’s Club 1931-32; was editor of the Indian Educator and the Sanctuary; chairman of the Board of Trust., Natal Ind. Sch. Building Trust 1954; vice-chairman Durban Internationa) Club; mem. of the national exec. of the S.A. Institute of Race Relations; mem. of the Council of the M. L. Sultan Technical College 1951-57. Hobby: Wireless and motor engineering. Address: Sastri College, Winterton Walk, Durban. LIMBADA, Ismail Cassim; b. Durban, March 28, 1923: 2nd. s. of Mrs. and the late Mr. Cassim Amod Limbada of Cavendish; educ. Sastri College, Durban; m.; 1 s., 1 d.; was manager A. S. Kajee’s bus service, Stanger; later as commercial traveller for Messrs. A. I. Kajee (Pty.) Ltd., Durban; later estd. own INDIAN WHO’S WHO business of broker and agent in Durban; was secty. for N.IL.O., Stanger branch, for a number of years; chairman of Motala’s Indian Lads’ Hostel, Wyebank, for five years and is now serving on its comm.; takes keen interest in educ. and social affairs of Indian community. Recreation: Swimming and _ soccer. Address: 22 Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 65581. LAZARUS, _ Dossen Jesudason; by Klipai- kum, Madras, 1878; educ. at the Lutheran Mission Sch., Mad- ras; came to S.A. in 1895; estd. bus. in Newcastle; 1905, transferred interest to Dannhauser; prop. of Lazarus ‘Bros.; motor and cycle dealers; Public activities: one of the founders of the N.D.LF.A.; one of the foundation mem. of the Dann- hauser Ind. School Management Board; was responsible for establishing the Newcastle Indian School in 1903; repstd. Natal at the S.A.LC. con- ference held in Cape Town; vice-pres. of N.D.LA.U.; was assoc. with Gandhi's Passive Resistance move- ment in 1913; a keen educationalist, and the members of his family are a testimony to this factor; pastor of the “Little Rain” International Assembly of S.A. (Dannhauser), which carries on Evangelist work among all sections of the community; attended religious conventions of this Assembly at Benoni and other parts of the Transvaal. Address: P.O. Box 3, Tel. add. “Lazarus,” Phone 3. Dannhauser, Natal. LOGANATHAN, Rungaswami, School- master; b. Pmb., Sept. 11, 1912; 2nd s. of Mr. and Mrs. V. R. Padayachee, of Pmb.; m. Salachee, 4th d. of late Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Govender, of Dbn.; 1 s., 3 d.; educ. York Rd. Govt. Ind. Sch.; teacher-training classes, Pmb.; was commissioner of oaths for Newcastle; prin- cipal, Dannhauser In- dian Sch., 1932/53; now prin. Pinetown Govt. Ind. Sch. Pub- lic activities: Life Pres. N.D.LF.A., N.D.I. Schools’ Sports Assn.; Pres. N.D.I-F.A., 1947/48; N.ILF.A. councillor, 17 years; Pres. 1950; referee 17 years; founder and first Pres N.D.I.C.C., 1937. Recreation: Gardening, sport. Add.: 18 Bishop Rd., Pinetown, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN LOWTON, Ramkishan (Alfred); Hindu priest; b. Newcastle, Natal, April 17, 1894; educ. A.M.E. Hindi School, Benoni and New Kleinfontein Govt. School; m. Rajkally, 4th d. of Gookool of Boom St., Pretoria; now retired; founder Hindi Vernacular School, Benoni; vice-pres. Hindu Mahasabah, Benoni; pres. (Mahauth) Sewnarian Sabha, Benoni; ex-secty. Coloured and Indian Mineworkers Union, Benoni; delegate Benoni branch at Hindu Mahasabha con- ference held at Durban in 1952; centre-forward Eastern Dist. F.A.; Moonlighters F.C., Johannesburg; employed at several gold mines on the Rand. Interests: Religious work among Hindu community. Address: 12 9th St., Asiatic Bazaar, Benoni. LUTCHMAN, Suruj- paul, businessman; b. Oct. 22, 1910, at Pmburg., Natal; s. of Lutchman; educated Sutherlands G.-A. In- dian Sch., Pmburg.; m., 5 d., I s. Prop. Mercantile Distribu- tors and Booksellers, Durban, suppliers of school text books, stationery and school requisites to the trade, colleges and primary schools. Recreation: Football, reading. Address: Bus. & Res., 56 Prince Edward St., Durban. MAGANLAL, _ Bha- gubhai, commercial agent; b. Navasari, India, 1909; m. Man- chi, d. o. D. Fakir; 1s, 4 d.; educ. Sir J. J. Sch., Navasari; came to S.A, 1917; bookkeeper since 1935; connected with firm B. Parbhoo; pro- moted mngr. 1937; Public activities: Was secty. Hindu Youth League; founder and secty. of Shree Nava- sani Moocht Mundal; Bharat Vidayala; secty. Tvl. Hindu Seva Samaj, Jhb.; vice-pres. S.A. Moochi Maha Sabha; at present assoc. with L. & L. Woollens Suiting Merchants. Address: 51 Commercial Rd., Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Phone 33-7938. MAGAN, Dr. Khandoobhai, M.B., Ch.B.; b. Cape Town 1919; e. s. of M. Parshotam; educ. Livingstone High Sch. and University of Cape Town; m. Manib- hen, e. d. of C. Sookahbhai, of Mombasa; 3 s., I d.; served housemanship Somerset Hospital, Cape Town; INDIAN WHO’S WHO 117 now practising in Cape Town. Public activities: Chair. Arya Yuavak Sabha; mem. Students’ Socialist Party; University of C.T.; mem. Indian Sports Board; patron of several organisations, Recreation: Motoring and classical music. Address: Wellington Rd., Wyn- berg, Cape Town, Phone 73336. MAGANLAL, Parbhoobhai, fruit merchant; b. Navsari, India, 1912; y. s. of late P. Dullabhbahi; m. Bhikiben, d. of Makan Rama; 2 s., 3 d. Came to S.A. 1925, assoc. with father’s bus.; estd. own business in 1932, trading as Standard Fruit Supply. Public activities: Treas. United Hindu Assn.; sec. Mod Ghanchi Mithra Mundal 1946; mem. of several Ind. societies in C.T. Address: 5 Lesar St., Phone 25909, Cape Town. MAGHARAJH, Kesriepersadh Lalla, fuel merchant; b. Mayville, Natal, 1925; s. of L. Magharajh; educ. at Cato Manor Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. Chander- bathie; d. of S. Magharajh. Bus.: Prop. of Durban Wood & Coal Supplies; prior to this was engaged in wholesale fruit bus. Public activities: Was a mem. of the Victory Social Club; foundation mem. of the Mayville Devi Pooja Samathie; keen physical cul- turist; took part in many wrestling bouts; mem. of the Keep-Fit Gymnasium Club; was trained by Rug- beer Maharaj, the undefeated lightweight champion of S.A. (wrestling). Interest: Reading. Address: 20 Factory Road, Mayville, Durban. Phone: Bus., 60649; Res., 885713. MAHABEER, Ramharak, clerk; b. Pmb., 1918; s. of M, Sudhen; educ. York Rd. Sch.; m. Dulary, d. of Mr. Chain, of Greytown, 3 s., 3 d. Bus.: Was engaged in watch repairing bus.; now conducts a dairy bus. Public activities: Was sec. V.V.P. Sabha; was mem. Aryan Benevolent Home; patron Star F.C. Address: 22 Glynn Rd., Pentrich, Pmburg, Phone 2-6969. MAHABEER, Ramnath, estate, insurance and finan- cial agent; b. Sydenham, Durban, 1935; educ. M. L. Sultan College (matriculated). Bus.: Repst. Provident Assurance Corporation Africa, Ltd.; took over bus. which was originally conducted by late father. Rec.: Soccer, tennis. Address: 336 Randles Rd., Sydenham, Durban. MAHARAJ, Chun- nehlal Sanker, cartg. contr.; b. Dannhauser, 1916; s. o. Sanker Maharaj; m. Jugrani. d. o. B. S. Singh of Dundee; 6 d.; educ. Miss Thomas Private School; estd bus. in 1938; Address: P.O. Box 60, Dannhauser, Natal.

---

## Page 8

118 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE BENGALI MAHABEER FAMILY A MAHABEER Bengali (late); b. Durban, 1895, died May 12, 1953; 4th s. of late Bengali, of India; m. Bachiya, y. d. of late Mr. Gunga of India; 3 s., 2 d.; one of the pioneers of passenger transport service, The Golden Eagle Transport Co.; prop. fresh produce deal’s bus.; was trustee of Shri Sanathan Sabha (Natal). MAHABEER, Peterlall, bus owner and fresh produce dealer; b. Westville, Nov. 3, 1927; y. s. of late Mr. B, Mahabeer of Westville; educ. St. Thomas’s Govt.- aided Ind. Sch., Westville, and Sastri College, Dur- ban. After leaving college, joined his father in bus., trading as R. Mahabeer Bros. Prop. fleet of buses. Interested in all forms of sport. Address: Bus., 7 Stratford Rd., Phone 21439, Durban; Res., 22 Essex Terr., Phone 85255, Westville, Natal. ys Nea MAHABEER, Ram- kewal, bus owner and fresh produce dealer; b, Westville, Jan. 2, 1923; e. s. of late Mr. B. Mahabeer of West- ville; m. Leliah, y. d. of Mr. Mungaroo of Verulam; 4 s., 2 d.; educ. St. Thomas’s Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Westville and Sastri College, Durban; was assoc. with father in bus., now in partnership with brother, trad- ing as R. Mahabeer Bros.; prop. fleet of buses. Pub. act.: Trustee Shri Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal) and was closely connected with Westville Sanathan Sabha Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; was a keen soccerite. Address: 7 Stratford Rd., Phone 21439, Durban; Res., 22 Essex Terr., Phone 85255, Westville, Natal. MAHABEER, Hansraj, bus owner and fresh produce dealer; b. Westville, Nov. 3, 1925; 2nd s. of late B. Mahabeer of Westville; m. d. of late Mr. Ram Ganas of Clairwood; educ. St, Thomas’s Ind. Sch., Westville and Sastri College, Durban. In partner- ship with his brother, trading as R. Mahabeer Bros.; prop, of fleet of buses. Address: Bus., 7 Strat- ford Rd., phone 21439, Durban; Res., 22 Essex Terr., Phone 85255, Wstvle., Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 119 M | & MAHABEER, Balbadhur, general merchant; b. Isipingo, 1898; e. s. of late Mahabeer of Isipingo; m. Surajdevi; 2 s., 5 d.; educ. Hoovers Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. Estd. bus. as general dealer in 1920, trad- ing at 445 Bluff Rd., Wentworth, Natal. Pub. act.: Vice-pres. Isipingo Ind. Soc.; trust. Shri Lutchmee Narayan Temple, Rossburgh; patron Isipingo F.C.; patron Isipingo C.C.; vice-pres. Swalestown F.C.; assoc, with religious and public bodies. Address: Bus., 445 Bluff Rd., Wentworth, Natal, Phone 87539; Res., 494 Bluff Rd., Wentworth, Natal, Phone 877056. MAHABEER, Churithur, general merchant; b. Isipingo, 1926; e. s. of B. Mahabeer, of Wentworth; m. Shanthula; educ. Clairwood Ind. Sch. and M. L. Sultan Tech. College, Durban. Joined his father in bus. as partner. Address: 445 Bluff Rd., Wentworth, Natal. The B. Mahabeer Family MAHABEER, Preeth, general merchant; b. Isipingo, Nov. 3, 1932; 2nd s. of B. Mahabeer, of Wentworth; m. Mynawathie; educ. Sastri College. Joined his father as partner in general dealer’s bus. Rec.: Tennis. Address: 445 Bluff Rd., Wentworth, Natal. HOV KRISHNA LALLA MAHARAJ FAMILY MAHARAJ, Krishna Lalla, storekeeper; b. Durban, Feb. 1, 1913; e. s. of Sunker Lalla Maharaj; m. Suminthra, d. of Balkaran Teewarie, of Mayville; 7 s., 2 d.; educ. Carlisle St. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Durban. Joined his father’s fresh produce bus. after leaving school in 1929, then branched out on his own in 1945 at the Squatters’ Market, Durban. Visited Ind. 1950. Pub. act.: Sec. Shri Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal); treas. Mayville Ind. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; treas. Sanathan Purohit Mundal (Durban); comm. mem. Durban Hindu Temple. Address: Res., 248 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban, Natal, Phone 884335; Bus., Squatters’ Market, Durban, Natal, Phone 23572, MAHARAJ, Suminthra Krishna, housewife; b. Dur- ban, 1925; 2nd d. of Balkaran Teewarie; m. Krishna Lalla Maharaj; 7 s., 2 d.; educ. St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham. Address: 248 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Dur- ban, Natal. MAHARAJ, Sunker Lalla, storekeeper; b. India, 1882; only s. of Sunker Maharaj; m. Lakhpath; 8 s., 6 d. educ. India. Prop. of fresh produce dealer’s bus. trading as Sunker Lalla Maharaj & Co., at 75/76 Ind. Market, Durban (estd. 1913). Pub. act.: Trust. Shri Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal). Student of the Vedic religion and staunch follower of the Sanathan faith. Address: 246 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 9

120 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO > THE B. A. MAHARAJ FAMILY MAHARAJ, Beharee Athmanand, eldest son of the late Mr. and Mrs. R. B. Maharaj; b. at Pietermaritzburg July 17, 1916; attorney-at-law; m. to Lilawathi Sosheila Maharaj; studied at St. Anthony’s Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; York Rd. Govt. Ind. Sch., Pietermaritzburg; Sastri College, Durban; University of Wit- watersrand, Johannesburg; Natal University College, Durban. Passed Bachelor of Arts Degree of the University of South Africa, Attorney’s Admission Examination of the Joint Committee of the Professional Examinations and admitted to the Side Bar (1944): practised at Pietermaritzburg till 1953 and thereafter practising in Durban. Pub. act.: Comm. mem. of the Natal Indian Congress (1938); Natal Indian Assoc. (1939); Natal Indian Assoc, (1940); sec./treas., Durban First Aid Service Battalion Union (1938-41); The Durban Asicolafrican League (1940-41); comm. mem, of the Indian Technical Educ. Comm., Durban (1940-41); conductor of classes in public speaking at Liberal Study Group, Durban (1942); co-editor of “Call” (1942-43); sec. Natal Indian Congress, Pietermaritzburg Branch (1945-47); Indian Football Assoc. (1947-52); chairman of the Natal Soccer Appeal Board (1947); council mem. of Maritzburg Indian Football ; (1940); Natal University College Students’ seine of Misconduct ae Enquiry Board thereof (1946-50); vice-pres, Stella Football Club, Pietermaritzburg (1946-47); patron thereof (1948-50); vice-pres., Standard Football Club (County) (1947); on interview to Ministers, including deputation of Natal Indian Congress to General Smuts, the Prime Minister of South Africa at Pretoria (1945); South African Indian Congress at Capetown (1947); executive mem. of South African Indian Congress (1946-47); council mem. of Maritzburg Indian Sports Assoc. (1947-48); publisher and assistant editor of “The Searchlight”, Indian national weekly (1946); mem. Natal Passive Resistance Council (1946); patron, Maritzburg Inter-Race Soccer Board (1947-48; council mem., Natal Inter-Race Soccer Board (1948-50); chairman of Joint Reception Committee, Maritzburg and District Indian Football Association and Maritzburg County Indian Football Association to Sam China Cup (1949); “Leader of Opposi- tion” “Maritzburg Indian Parliament” (1949); “Prime Minister” thereof (1950); pres. Maritzburg and District Indian Football Assoc. (1952); comm. mem. Veda Dharma Sabha (1953) and its representative to Arya Pratinidhi Sabha (1953-54); representative, Liberal Party Pietermaritzburg Branch to the First National Conference of the Liberal Party at Johannesburg (1954); Arya Pratinidhi Sabha to South African Hindu Maha Sabha (1954); Natal Indian Football Association to South African Indian Football Association (1952-53); councillor, Soccer Federation of South Africa (1952-54); on deputation, Soccer Federation to South African Football Association for recognition at Federal Internationale de Football Association (F.I.F.A.) (1953); chairman Hindu Youth Conference (Natal) (1953); patron Avalon Sporting Club, Durban (1955-56); patron Aces Football Club (1957-58). Travelled extensively in South Africa, Hobby: Gardening. Durban. sec. Nationalist Bloc of the council mem. of the Natal MAHARAJ, Lilawathi Sosheila, 2nd daughter of Mr. and the late Mrs. J. K. Maharaj; b. at Dur- ; studied at the Dartnell and Natal University College; teacher at several Indian schools; passed Bachelor of Arts of the University of South Africa (1947); attended Wentworth i i College (1954); served articles of clerkship with her husband (1948-51). Hobby: Gardening. ban on Dec. 3, Crescent Ind. Girls’ Vidur; b. Oct. 12, 1947, at Durban; e. s.; at Sir Kurma Reddi Govt.-aided Ind...Sch., Durban. Janita; b. Oct. 8, 1950, at Pietermaritzburg; e. d.; student at Sir Kurma Reddi Govt.-aided Ind. Sch., Panin; s.; b. Sept. 7, 1956, at Durban. . THE SOUTH AFRICAN MAHARAJ, Frank, garage proprietor; b. Greytown; s. of Sewlal Maharaj; m. Alexandra, d. of Kavere; 2 s., 2 d.; educ. Greytown Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and York Rd. Govyt.-aided Ind. Sch. Came to Dundee and district in 1916; started bus. at Waschbank in 1928. Public activities: Played soccer for Dundee Rovers F.C.; chairman for local School Board and Health Commission; local supervisor of the Child Welfare Soc.; largely responsible for the erection of the New Ind. Sch. Address: Ralfe St., Waschbank, P.O. Box 3, Phone 3. MAHARAJ, Jaikrun Dwarka Persad, b. Jan. 9, 1915, Clare Estate, Durban; s. of Jaikrun, Panday; educ. Sastri College, Durban; m. Dew- pathy, y.d.o.]. Mr. Juggernath Maharaj, of Overport, Natal; 1 s. Business: Ex-day school teacher, Natal Educ. Dept.; at pre- sent manager Avalon and Albert Cinemas, Durban; interested in Indian _ photographic studios. Public activi- ties: Mem. Shri Sana- than Dharma Sabha, Natal: mem. of numerous sporting bodies. Recreation: Tennis. Address: 24 Ward Road, Sydenham, Durban. MAHARAJ, Sewnath Ramcharan; b. July 1, 1896, Verulam, Natal; only s. of Ramcharan Maharaj, Verulam; m. Feb, 1910; 3 s., 4 d. Business: Sugar cane planter since 1920 at Maidstone and Veru- Jam. Visited India in 1937. and took cre- mated ashes of father and mother to Kashi and Gaya. Met Ma- hatma Gandhi and several Indian leaders. Visted many Hindu temples, and the Nil- gri hills. Was guest of Maharaja of Porbandar. Public activities: Trustee and sec, Shree Gopalall Temple; trustee V. Crematorium; mem. V.H. Burial Soc., V.I. Sch. Board, Maidstone 1. Mill Group, N.C. Growers’ Group, Maidstone and Greyland Road Com.; sec. Umhl. I. Ratepayers’ Assoc.; mem. Shri Sanathan D. Sabha (Durban); interested in all Hindu religious and social welfare work in Verulam. Recreation: Cricket and football. Address: P.O. Verulam, Natal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 121 MAHARAJ, Norman Dewijee Joshua, legal clerk; b. Port Shep- stone. Aug. 22, 1910; S. 0. Mungal Maharaj: educ. Malvern Govt.- aided Indian School, Hige Grade Ind. Sch., Dbn. and Sastri Col.: m. Jurie, e. d. o. Kessar Bhagwandas of Duffs Rd., Natal; 3 s., 4 d. Bus.: Joined the firm of Willcocks & Le Marchand; held position for past 27 years. Pub. activities: donated trophy to Pinetown Ind. Sch. in memory of late mother; trus. & vice-chairman Pine- town Hindu Sabha 1943-56; treas. Motala Indian Lads Hostel 1937-47; chairman Pinetown Ind. Sch. meal service 1949-56; comm. mem. Pinetown Ind. Ratepayers’ Assn.; sec. P. & D.LLA.C. 1935-39; sec./ treas. Ind. B. Soc. 1940-44; comm. mem. Pinetown Child Welfare Soc. 1939-44. Frara farm Hindu Temple 1939-40; delegate to Hindu Mahasabha 1943-54; vice-pres. Wyebank Sporting Club 1942; auditor Pinetown & Dist. Tamil Sch.; patron of Frara’s Farm Hindu Temple 1941, also Sarnia Saras- wathie Samanasa Valiba Nadana Sabha 1943-44; Premier Angling Club 1949; sec. Boy Scout Group 1950; trus. Richmond Farm Temple 1954-56; treas. Pinetown Dist. Ind. Relief Comm. 1939; comm. mem. Durban Hindu Temple. Recreation: Tennis. Club: International Club, Durban. Address: 26 Payn St., Pinetown, Natal. MAHARAJ, S. N,, bldg. contr.; b. Dbn., 1905; educ. Durban Higher Grade Sch. Bus.: Commenced bldg. career 1928 working as bricklayer at salary of one shil- ling per day; now one of the leading Ind. bldg. contrs. in Natal; trading as S. Maharaj & Sons; has executed work for bldg. soc.; bldgs. being mostly for European occupation; also completed con- tracts for Corporation and Natal Housing Board; has built at Brighton Beach, Dbn. North, Berea, Westville, Kloof and Reservoir Hills; takes a keen interest in soccer. Add.: 40. Hammersmith Avenue, Durban.

---

## Page 10

122, THE SOUTH AFRICAN MAHARAJ, Ramharak, farmer; b. Verulam, 1906; 3rd.s. of late R. Maharaj, of Verulam; educ. Verulam and Durban; m. Rani-Devi, e. d. of M. S. R. Maharaj, of Stanger; 6 s., 1 d.; after a period of private em- ployment assisted father in cane farming; at present working own farm at Newlands. Public activities: Was a mem. of the Arya Yuvuk Sabha; was a mem. of the Arya Prathinidi Sabha; mem. of Newlands Arya Samaj; mem. of Bhajan Mundal, Newlands. Recreation: Reading. Address: Res. (Samaj Mansion), Newlands, P.O. Duff Rd., Newlands. MAHARAJ, Sidgopal, co. dretr.; 2nd s. of Sadanudh Maharaj of Verulam; b. Verulam, July 28, 1910; m. 2nd d. of Mr. and Mrs. R. Bodasing of New Guelderland; 3 s., 2 d.; educ. Umbloti Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. and M. L. Sultan Tech. College, Dbn.; joined the teaching staff of Umhloti Ind. Sch. in 1930 and dur- ing the 4 years there he obtained both the Ind. Teachers’ Junior Certificate and the T4; Resigned from teaching profession in 1934 to join the National Fuel Supply Co. of which he became managing director in 1951; gained distinction in book- keeping and commerce at M. L. Sultan Tech. College and in 1938 won three Gold Medals at the Indian Eisteddfod. Public activities; Capt. Umbloti F.C.; played for Verulam C.C.; was mem. and auditor of Spes Bona Tennis Club; mem. Victory Angling Club; conducted own physical culture club at Umbhloti as also a private Afrikaans class; is a Zulu linguist. Interests: History and travel. Address: Bus., 236 Umgeni Rd., Phones 24974, 24480, Durban; Res., 1 Ireland St., Verulam, Phone 170. MAHARAJ, Sookdeo Ramnath, bookkeeper; b. Dannhauser, 1919; s. of Ramnath Maharaj; m. Deva- money, d. of R. B. Singh, of Glencoe; 2 s., 1 d.; educ. Dannhauser Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. Public activities: Sec. Dannhauser Child Welfare Soc.; vice- pres. N.D. I.F.A.; sec. Sch. Meal Service; vice-pres. Dannhauser U.F.C.; vice-pres. Dannhauser U.C.C.; chair. Dannhauser Angling Club; com. mem, Dann- hauser Sch. Brd. Recreation: Fishing, tennis. Address: P.O. Box 22, Dannhauser, Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO MAHATEY, Hoosen Allie, general mer- chant; b. Makhjan, Ratnagiri, India, May 5, 1918; s. 0. A. May- oden Makhjan; educ. Zonnebloem College, Cape Town and Ratna-girt High Sch. and Bhave High Sch., Poona, and studied at the Bombay Univer- sity; m. Zulekah, d.o. Cader of Kimberley; was associated with father’s bus. and now trading under own name. Pub. activities: treas. of Cape Mus- lim Circle; was treas. of Bengal Famine Relief; sec. of the Young Kokanie Moslem Soc.; asst. sec. Moslem Hospital Welfare Soc.; also sec. and treas. of the Indian Traders’ Assn.; sec. of the S.A. Kokanie Mos- lem League; sec. of the Indian Com. for Group Areas. Recreation: Boxing and cricket. Address: Bus. and Res., 69 Ravenscraig Rd., Walmer Estate, Cape Town, Phone 53604. MAHMOOD, Abdul Gaffoor, merchant; b. Beacon Field, Kimberly, 1911; s. of Mahmood Samnakay; m. Madina Abdulla Jamadar; educ. Perserverance Sch., Kimberly; 5 s., 3 d. Bus.: Estd. bus. in Cape Town in 1935, trading as A. G. Mahmood. Public activities: Foundation and life trustee of the Elsies River Muslim Educ. Soc.; was chairman of the soc. for seven years and now its chairman; collected large sums of money towards the erection of a Mosque and sch. in Elsies River; also takes an active part in the organisation of sports and the affairs of the non-European community in general. Recreation: Cricket. Address: 5 6th St., Elsies River, Phone 988066, Cape Town; Bus., A. G. Mahmood, P.O. Box 24, Elsies River, Cape Town. MAHMOOD, Mohamed Sharief, town councillor and merchant; b. Kimberly, Dec. 31, 1913; m. Shariffa, d. of Midad Khan, of Cape Town; educ. Kimberly, Cape Town and India (Bombay); 2nd s. of late Mahmood Malum; 3 s., 2 d.; estd. own business in 1937, trading as G. M. Bazaar, with branches in Epping Forest and 12th Ave.; toured India several times; has been Town Councillor since 1944; official of several sporting and public bodies; foundation mem. of Eastern United T.C. Recreation: Cricket. Address: Bus. and Res., 5 6th St., Elsies River, Phone 985343, P.O. Box 24; Phone 98806 (Cape Town). ‘ MAHOMED, Adam, sales manager; b. at Stanger, Natal; s. of Mahomed Cassim; educ. Umhloti Govt. Ind. Sch., Verulam; m., 5 children; manager of Adamsville Service Station. Public activities: Mem. of the Durban and District Road Safety Assn. Address: 11 Salvia Rd., Springfield, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 123 MAHOMED, Amod Suleman, timber and cartage contractor; b. Howick, 1918; s. of A. Mahomed, of Mauritius; educ. Howick Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. Rasool Bibi, d. of Mr. Mansoor, of Pietermaritzburg; 1 d.; on leaving sch. joined late father’s bus.; took over control 1946; now trading as Ismail Bros. and Mahomed’s Fruit Store; also conducts cartage con- tractors bus.; was comm. mem. of Madressa Mosque 1956-57; mem. Sarmcol F. Club. Address: 23 Bell St., Howick, Natal. MAHOMED, Cassim (Bradford), manufacturer; b. Durban, 1910; y. s. of Cassim Malangshah; m. d. of Bachoo Mia; 3 s., 1 d.; educ. at Higher Grade Govt.- aided Ind. Sch.; on leaving school embarked on a commercial career; later estd. own clothing factory. Public activities: chairman Muslim Angling Club; vice-pres. Muslim Burial Soc.; mem. International University Soc.; a donor to Islamia Madressa, Over- port. Recreation: Tennis and Angling. Address: 16 Lodge Grove, Overpoort, Durban; Bus., 47-49 Con- gella Rd., Durban. MAHOMED, Essack, salesman; b. Veru- lam, 1936; s. 0. Mahomed Hassim; educ. at St. Aidans Boys Sch., Sydenham. Bus.: General sales- man, dealing in soft goods, silks, nylons, hardware and patent medicine; keen social worker, an outstand- ing athlete; has won a large collection of trophies at various athletic meetings; a keen soccerite; mem. of the Sydenham and Dist. Athletic Club. Address: 593 Bellair Rd., Mayville, Durban. a MAHOMED, Essop, b. Kolaba, India; e. s.o. Ismail Mahomed; educ. at Kannumiya Sch., Cape Town; m.; 3 s., 9 d.; took over bus. on death of father; 1940, estd. own bus.; trading as Janjira Cafe; 1949, opened bus. at 14 Stuckeris St., trading under the style of Medina Cafe and General Dealer; one of the leading cafes in Cape Town. Pub. act.: Member of _ several : Indian public bodies in Cape Town; mem. of the Musical Club. Recrea- tion: Reading. Address: Bus., 14 Stuckeris St., Cape Town, Phone 36560. MAHOMED, Essop, wholesale and retail merchant and direct importer; trading as M. Ebrahim & Sons, Address: 128 Potgieter St., Nylstroom, P.O. Box 41, Phone 82. MOHAMED, _ Hajee Saleh, F.R.E.S., F. Com. Sc. A. FPLC, commisnr. of oaths, sworn translator of the Supreme Court of S.A. (T.P.D.), secty. of companies; b. Dur- ban, 1901; 4th s. late Haj. Abdulla; m. d. o. late Osman Haj. Soomar of Dbn.; estd. bus. in 1926 as gen. agt. and public book- keeper and broker and bus. consultant; Ind. agt. for Sea Insur. Co. Ltd.; mngr. Central Trust Co.; sworn translator in English-Gujarati and Urdu; holds dip- lomas of the Royal Economic Soc. and Assoc. of Commercial Science of England. Public activities: Hon. gen. sec. Memon Educ. Soc. and Welfare Soc. since its inception; founder of Jinnah’s Memorial Muslim Youth Brigade, also chairman of the Coun- cil; founder of Islamic League of S.A.; has travelled extensively in Africa, Europe, India and Pakistan in the course of his work. Address: 24 Market St., Johannesburg, P.O. Box 420, Tel. Add., “Hajiab- ae Phones: Res., 763-1067; Office 33-8204 and -1361. MAISTRY, Kistasamy Thangvelu, teacher; b. New- castle, Dec., 1919; s. of Thangavelu Maistry; educ. St. Oswald’s High School, Sastri College, 1940/41; m. Ambeya, d. of P. Naicker, of Port Shepstone; 2 s.; was on the staff of Depot Road Govt. Indian School, now at Clairwood High Sch. Public activities: Hon. sec. N.I.T.S. Durban Central Branch; sec. Natal Ind. Sch. F.A. 1954-55; hon. life vice-pres. N.D.I.F.A.; hon. sec. N.D.LF.A. 1943; hon. sec. Child Welfare Soc. 1944-51; hon. sec. Newcastle Bursary Soc.; pres. Newcastle Study Group; played soccer for N.I.F.C. Recreation: Reading. Address: Carlyle Castle, Carlyle St., Durban. MAKAN, Jeevan, o. s. of Makan Bhana; b. Navasari, India, 1905; educ. India; m. Kasst, d. of Chibakalan, of India; 4 s., 3 d.; was in partnership with father, 1923 took over trading as Jeevans Laundry; vice- chairman E.L. Hindu Soc.; in younger days was mem. Hindu Sports Club; visited India 1922, 1927, 1931, 1938, 1950. Address: 73 St. Marks Rd., East London.

---

## Page 11

124 THE SOUTH AFRICAN MAITER, Goolam Hoosen Amod; mer- chant and farmer; b. at Verulam, May 26, 1891; 2nd s. of Hajee Amod Maiter; educ. at Verulam; on leav- ing school accom- panied father on Pil- grimage to Mecca in 1903, and on return joined father’s busi- ness with other bro- thers; now in charge of the firm of M. Maiter Bros. Public activities: Chairman, Verulam Young Mus- lim Society since 1918; sec. and treas. Muslim Mosque for many years; a keen sportsman; patron Verulam Indian Football Club; patron North Coast Indian Football Assoc. and held various offices; capt. Verulam Cricket Club; patron Verulam Tennis Club; a strong supporter of sports among Bantus, being the treas. of the North Coast Independent Assoc.; patron Timberit Football Club and Verulam and Dist. Indian Football Assoc. and many other clubs. Recreation: Cricket. Pilgrim- age to Mecca in 1949 via East Coast. Committee mem. of Central Factory Indian Mill Group Board. Add.: Res.. 17 Groom Street, Phone 136, Verulam, Natal. MAKAN, _ Parbhoo, wholesale and gen. retail mcht.; b. 1915, Sadadral, Surat, India; s. o. M. Bhana; educ. Dower Sch., Port Elizabeth; m. Manie, d. o. S. Kangee; 2 s.. 3 d. Bus.: Assisted father in bus.; trading as Makan Bhana; took over control 1940; trading as National Wholesalers and Makan Bhana & Sons; the firm being one of the largest establishments of this kind in the city. Pub. activities: Trust. of Gujerati Mundal; mem. of Hindu Soc.; patron of Aryan Sports Club; played cricket for Orient Ind. Cricket Club; visited India 1952, accompanied by family. Recreation: Sports, motoring. Address: 17 South Union St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 24521. MAKANBHAI, Daijee; general dealer; b. Adada, Dist. Surat, India, in 1908; s. of Dajee Tabir; educ. in India; m. Vajia, d. of Hansjee Vallabh; 6 s., 1 d. Business: West End Shoe Store, est. in 1928, 28 West Street, Johannesburg, Phone 34-2253. INDIAN WHO'S WHO MAKANJEE, Dayal- jee Haribhai, whole- sale gnrl. merchants; b. Feb. 24, 1917, Pmburg., Natal; e. s. of Haribhai Makan- jee; educ. Sastri Col- lege, Dbn., & Wood- lands H.S., Pmb.; m. 2nd d. of Vanmally Parsotam Mistry; 3 s.. 4 d. Business: Whole- sale merchants; began with the firm of Bombay Bazaars, Dbn,; est. wholesale merchants’ business in 1946 in Dbn.; director Spearman _ Road Trading Co., Booth Road Supply Stores and Brook- bourne Lounge. Public activities: Com. mem. Surat Hindu Assoc.; patron Overport Social Club and Rangers F.C.; mme. F.O.S.A. Overport Care Com- mittee; interested in all progressive movements in the community. Recreation: Tennis. Add.: Bus., Phone 27926, 149 Brook St., Durban; Res., 61 Hill St., Phone 884740, Overport, Natal. So MANI, Govan, busi- nessman; b. Kashhia- wadi, Navsari, India. March 18, 1900; s. of Mani Dayal; educ. Kachhiawadi, India, Malvern Ind. Sch. and Indian Institute, Dbn.; m; fs. 1 d. Bus.: Came to Natal in 1911; in 1928 estd. own bus. as gen. dlr. and imp., known as Govan Mani & Co. Public activities: pres. Surat Hindu Assn. (1933-34); re-elected in 1950; secty. Surat Hindu Assn. (1933- 34); sec. Surat Hindu Educ. Soc. 1934; treas. Surat Hindu Educ. Soc. 1941-45; trustee and treas. Gandhi Tagore Lect. Trust since 1937; pres. S.A.H. Maha Sabha 1954-55; vice-chair. Ramakrishna Centre (S.A., Durban Branch). Address: Bus., 449 Grey St., Phone 22585, Durban; Res., 150 Victoria St., Phone 20168, Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN MALL, Advocate, only practicing Non- European Advocate in Natal; educ. Sastri College, Fort Hare & Cape Town Univer- sity; Vice-Pres. N.LC. Interested in Inter- national Film Society; took an active part in Sport and Student Affairs; prominent in public affairs. Practic- ing in Durban. MANJEE, Mohanlal, wholesale merchants; e. s. of Thaker Man- jee; b. Durban, Nov. 16, 1919; educ. Higher Grade and Greyville Govt. Ind. Schools & matriculated at Sastri College; m. in 1940 at a 3 Bhavnagar, India; 2 me [iy s. Business: Joined be f ad father’s business, Vic- ‘ pelt, toria Produce Co., ex- ; : porters and importers : of grain products. a Public activities: Ex- v ’ treas. S.A-H. Maha ‘ 7 Sabha; ex-pres. and mem. Bharat C.C.; ex-sec. and mem. Gujerati Cul. Soc.; foundation mem. M.D. & D.T. Tennis Union; editor Vedic Voice and organiser of the Vedic Centre. Address: Bus., 119 Victoria St.. Phone 22591; Res., 133 Victoria St., Phone 25419, Durban. MAROOF, Sheriff Mohedien, merchant; b. Furus, Dist. Ratnagiri, India; edué. India; arrived in S.A. 1912; estd. general dealers bus. Public activities: Mem. C.I.C., delegate to conference of S.A.I.C. in Johannesburg, 1943; mem. N.E.L. League; mem. Cape Peninsula Ind. Traders’ Assn.; mem. Koknie Muslim Soc.; mem. Al-Azza Mosque Working Comm.; pres. and trustee Al-Azhar Mosque; chairman Sirj-ul-Islam Educ. League of Furus; joint treas. and trust. Educ. Soc., and Hospital Welfare; mem. Al-Hidayah Isla- mic Educ. Comm. Recreation: Reading, Islamic, Urdu and Marathee. Address: Bus., 161 Constitution St., Cape Town, Phone 21998; Res., 1 Cauvin St., Cape Town, Phone 24634. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 125 MANSEE, Thaker, whlsle. merchant; s. of Odhavjee Kurji, of Bhanvad, India; b, Bhanvad, Jamnagar State, India, in 1890; educ. Bhanvad, India; m. Raliyat in 1917; 4 s, 3 d. Came to S.A. in 1906; began produce business in Durban in 1910; in 1924 started Victoria Produce Co., exprtrs. and imprtrs. of grain products, trading with Mauritius, Cey lon, Kenya, Tanganyika & P.E.A. Public activi- ties: Joint treas. Hindu Crematorium and Cemetery; and trustee Kathiawal Hindu Siva Samaj. Address: Bus., 119 Victoria St., Durban; Res., 133 Victoria St., Phone 25419, Durban. MASLAMONEY, Anthony Leo, b. Dur- ban; 1913; e. s. o. late F. Maslamoney; educ. Clairwood Ind. School and Carlisle Govt. Indian School; m. Cathrine, d. o. late N. Dhana of Kimber- ley; 5 s, Id.; was employed as lawyer's clerk; 1934, moved to East London and entered catering trade; transferred to Cape Town in 1938; estd. gen. dirs. bus; also traded in patent med. and herbs. Pub, act.: Founder of Blue Bells F.C. in East London; founder of Blue Bells P.C.C. and was pres. of the club for seven years; was treas. W.P.I.F.A.; rep. W.P.LF.A. as delegate to S.A.I.F.A.; exec. mem. of the Liquor and Catering Trade; rep. the Liquor and Catering Trade Union on the Industrial Council; was pres. of the W.P.IF.A. in 1951; was the pres. of the Jubilee Tournament in 1953, held in Johannesburg; manager of the Quadrangle Tournament in 1948; also hon. life vice-pres. for W.P.I.F.A.; an ardent worker and organiser for the Catholic Mission in Cape Town. Recreation: Soccer and cricket. Address: 92 Victoria Road, Woodstock, Cape Town, Phone 58034, C.T.

---

## Page 12

126 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO MASTER, Bhikhab- hai Ukabhai, b. Aat, Dist., Surat, 1902; educ. Govt. Ind. Sch., Johannesburg. Came to Transvaal with father in 1912; on jeavng sch. estd. book- keeping agency with offices at Pietersburg, Pretoria, Johannes- burg and Louis Tri- chardt; later estd. gen. dirs. bus., trading as Master Bros; special- ising in millinery; has now developed bus. into wholesale firm. Public activities: First sec, of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj 1932; con- tributed and helped with the collection of funds for 4 Hindu ward at the hospital, Gandhi Hall and Gandhi School in Johannesburg; treas. of the Hindu Crematorium Comm.; founder, sec. pres. and vice- chairman, Transvaal Prajapte Assoc.; contributed generously towards the Hindu Students Hostel; Trans- vaal Prajapte Vidyarthi Ashram; Press correspondent for Gujerati papers. Address: 33 West St., Jhb. MASTHAN, Sbaik Nabbie Ismail, tailor; b. Durban, 1907: s. of S. Nabbie, of Madras; educ. Clairwood Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. d. of S. Subedar, of Dur- ban; 4 s., 2 d. Public activities: Foundation mem. South Coast and Dist. Muslim Assoc.; vice-pres. S.C. Madressa Govt-aided Ind. Sch.; one of those responsible for the estb. of this building; Capt. Hulett’s C.C. 1930-31; later was mem. Muslim C.C.; mem. Clairwood Sch. Old Boys Club. Address: 17 Sirdar Rd., Clairwood. MEER, Ahmed Ismail, mnfrs.’ reprs. and journalist; b. Dundee; m. d. o. C. A. Meer of Wasch- bank; educ. Surat and S.A. Bus.: Joined Ind. Views in 1934; estd. own press 1937; trad- ing as Express Print- ing Works; now com- mercial salesman; Public activities: Was secty. of Master Printers’ Assn.; has contributed numerous articles to the S.A. Press; former secty. S.A.L.C.; mem. Pas- sive Resistance Council; served a term of imprison- ment for defying the Asiatic Land Tenure and Ind. Repst. Act 1946; repst. S.A. Indian community at United Nations at Lake Success; was served with two banning orders by the Minister of Justice, prohibiting him for a period of five years from attending gather- ings and confining his movements within the Magisterial Dist. of Durban for 12 months; the first person in S.A. to be so banned; chairman of N.LC. (Central Branch) for several years. Address: 62 Ritson Rd., Durban. MATTHEWS, Wilfred Ebenezer, clerk; b. at New Hanover, 1929; 4th s. of J. I. Matthews, of Sea View; educ. at Sastri College, matriculated 1949; m. Cyn- thia Eunice, d. of late V. Saravan; served as a clerk with European firms; later joined F.O.S.A. in 1955, mem. of the Pinetown Child Welfare Soc.; mem. of the Anglican Church; was a mem. of the Pinetown Football Club. Recreation: Tennis and_philately. Address: P.O. Box 2079, Durban; Res., 38 Hill St. Pinetown, Natal. MEERAN, Abdul Kader, b. Nottingham Road, April 16, 1908; s. 0. Meeran; m.; 4 s., 4 d.; educ. Suther- lands Govt.-aided Ind. School and York Rd. Ind. School. Occ.: Principal. Public act.: Founder mem. and ex- secty, N.N. Ind. Lawn T.U.; ex-pres. Dundee and Weenen County I.F.A.; since 1944, served as pres., selctr., mngr. and on comm. of Enquiry of M.D. LF.A. and N.LF.A.; mem. of exec, Natal Inter-race §. Board; vice-pres. of N.J.R.A.; ex sec. and exec, mem. N.I.C.U.; first pres. of N.LC.U. after partition; sec. Pmb. Ind. Sports Grounds Assoc. since 1949; org. sec. P. Ind. Tech. Inst.; mem. Bursary Loan Board of N.1.T.S., Pmb. branch; treas. N.1.T-.S., Pmb. branch; treas. Indo-European Joint Council; chairman Management Board of A.B.S. Trustee Child Welfare Soc., Pmb.; patron Pentrich Muslim Soc.; mem, Natal Muslim Counc.; commenced teaching in 1923 as assistant teacher at Sutherlands Ind. Sch.; from 1929 to June, 1946, taught in Govt. Sch.; pro- moted vice-principal in Aug., 1946, and principal since April, 1947. Address: 418 Berg St., Pmb., Phone 24378. MIA, Charfaray Abbas, general dealer; b. Bankot Dist. Ratnagiri, India; s. of Hassan Mia; educ. private and public education; m. Minnié Adams; 5 s., 3 d.; prop. Tanda Bantu Stores. Public activities: Was capt. Ottomans C.C., Krugersdorp; «sec. Ambeet Muslim Jamat; mem. and exec. comm. Tvl. Moslem League; sec. Springs Madressa; founder of Taj Club, Jhb. Recreation: Reading. Address: Stand No. 1578a, Bakerton, Springs, Transvaal, Phone 564436. - THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO MAYET, Hajee Fakir Hassen, Wholesale Merchant and Importer; b. 1884, Alipur Surat; s.o. late H. Mayet; educ. Private Study; 6 s., 2 d. Estd. Bus. as General Dealer in 1902 in partnership with Moosa Hassan, trading as Moosa Hassen & Co.; became sole proprietor in 1923. Public activities: Founder and Trus. Alipur Moslem Trust, Johannesburg; Founder and Trust. Himayatul Islam; an ardent worker for Education, also interested in Theological Studies. Add.: 159 Market St. and 6 Kort St., Johannesburg, Box 5670, Phone 337953; Res., 63 Nugget St., Phone 224938. MAYET, Hajee Ismail Fakir Hassen, Wholesale Merchant and Director of Companies; b. 3lst May, 1925, Johannesburg; Sth s.o. Fakir Hassen Mayet; educ. Johannesburg Ind. High Sch. and Havard Private College; m. Hawaboo, d. of Mohamed Akoob Laher, 3 s., 2 d.; now managing partner in the firm of F. Hassen, Wholesale Merchants. Public activities: Secty. Madressa Himyatul Islam; Exec. Mem. Alipan Moslem Trust; Founder and Treasurer, Coloured and [Indian Blind Welfare Assn., Chair. Transvaal Indian Cricket Union; Pres. Transvaal Indian Lawn Tennis Assn.; represented Transvaal in inter-Provincial Tournaments; Pres. Trans- vaal Lawn Tennis Federation; Vice-Pres. S.A. Indian Cricket Union; Founder and Pres. Transvaal Cricket Umpires Assn.; Founder and Sec. Muslim Cultural Inst. Comm. Mem. Johannesburg Ind. Social Welfare Soc.; Patron Tvl. Amateur Athletic Assn.; Founder/Treasurer Tvl. Table Tennis Assn.; Mem. Johannesburg Sports Ground Assn.; Chairman Kismet Cricket Club (Jhb.) Rec.: Cricket, Tennis, Billiards and Table Tennis. Add.: 6 Kort St., Johannesburg, Box 5670, Phone 337953; Res., 63 Nugget Street, Phone 224938. MAYET, Hajee Mohamed Fakir Hassen. Add.: 6 Kort St., Johannesburg, Box 5670, Phone 337953. The Fakir Hassen Mayet Family 127

---

## Page 13

128 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO Mohamed Saley (Chummy) Mayet Family MAYET, Mohamed Saley (“Chummy”), insurance agent and wholesale merchant; b. Johannesburg, 1921; s. of Salejee Hassan; educ. Bree St. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m.; 4 children. Was assoc. with father’s business, trading under the style of Saley Ebrahim & Co.; estd. own bus. in 1942, trading as Saley’s Agency; in 1946 estd. Selfast Textile Company, one of the leading lace specialists in the Transvaal; also repre- sentative for insurance company in the Transvaal. Pub. act.: Sec. Transvaal Indian Cricket Union, 1946; one of the leading sports administrators in the Transvaal; took an active part in the progress of the Sports Grounds Assoc.; keen cricketer and soccerite; has played an important part in all social wel- fare organisations in Johannesburg. Rec.: Sports. Address: 2la Commissioner St., Johannesburg, Phone 337356, P.O. Box 861. JASAT, Abdulhak Mahomed, associated with firm of Saley’s Agency. Address: P.O. Box 861, Johannesburg, Phone 337356. THE SOUTH AFRICAN MEER, Ismail Chota, B.A., LL.B.; married Fatima M. Meer (pro- minent Ind. Social Worker and Politi- cian); educ. Sastri College, N.U.C. and Wits. Public Act.: Played prominent part in Anti - Segregation Council and was Sec. and Vice-President of N.I.C.; was discharged at end of preparatory examination of Trea- son Trial. Add.: 30 Wicks St., Verulam, Natal; P.O. Box 61. MEERAN, Mahomed; b. Nottingham Road, July, 1909; 2nd s. of Ebrahim Meeran; m. Fathima Bibi, d, of Mahomed Ali, of Edendale, 4 s., 1 d.3 educ. Sutherlands G.A. Ind. Sch. After leav- ing school he farmed for a while with his father and, since 1924, ". .« has been employed at * Eddels (S.A.) Ltd. Migyt Foundation mem, of 3 : fe Pmburg. branch Nat. a alee Union of Leather- : f Ee workers, Maritzburg County Ind. Football Assn., Maritzburg County Ind. Sports Club, Pentrich Muslim Society, Pmburg. Inter-race Soccer Board; on all of these organisations he has held senior executive posts. Plays a leading part in the community life of Pentrich and Camps Drift district as well as in the City. Address: 97 Camps Drift Road, Pentrich, Phone 2-1354. MEHTA, Thakorprasad Chotalal, Barrister-at-Law, London; educ. Sastri College and London; practiced for a time at Bombay, now in Durban. Public act.: Acting Secretary N.I.C. Rec.: Chess, Cricket. Add.: 46c Queen St., Durban. MIA, Ishmail Essop, commissioner for oaths 1937: b. Simlak, Dist. Surat, 1910; s. of Hajee Essop Ismail Mia, well-known merchant of the Transvaal; educ. Govt. Ind School and Muslim University, Aligarh. Came to South Africa when a baby; after school entered business; now the proprietor of Suleman Ismail Mia & Co., Rustenburg, with branch in the Rustenburg district. Public activities: Sec. T.1.C. (Rustenburg branch); repr. Rustenburg at the T.LC. Conference, 1933; mem. of the Muslim Welfare Assn., Rustenburg, and interested in the public welfare efforts of the community. Address: S. I. Mia & Co., 43 Market St., Johannesburg; P.O. Box 28, Phone 28, Rustenburg, Transvaal. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 129 MINTY, Ahmed Is- mail, barrister-at-law; b. Jan. 19, 1908; educ. Aligarh Univ., India; London Univ. in 1932 and Middle Temple, Lond.; after qualify- ing practised law in Bombay for 3 yrs.; thereafter practised in one Jhb.; was secretary of the Tvl. Ind. Congress . 1946; pres. Transvaal Indian Organisation ; since its inception in 1947; pres, S. M. Nana Memorial Trust. Add.: Bus., 17 Becker St., Johannes- a pam 338201; Res., 24 Gillies St., Jhb., Phone 7961. MISRA, Pundit Mewa, priest; b. 1870, Bihar, India; educ. India, Hindi High School, Chapra Jeela School, Patna City School; received a scholarship to study med. at Patna Med. School; after Ist year decided to emigrate to S.A.; was em- ployed by Natal Govt. Railways; after a period was promoted to station master at Greenwood Park, Durban, being the only Indian in the Province to hold such a position; the honour was bestowed by Sir David Hunter, System Manager; only surviving life trustee of Sea Cow Lake Vishnu Temple; com. mem. of Somsetsu Rd. Hindu Temple; chairman of Brahmin Mundal; patron Sanathan Dharma Sabha, Natal. Address: 75 Kenilworth Rd., Durban. MISTRY, Sukha Morar, b. India, 1917; educ. Bethal and Johannesburg. Bus.: Bookkeeper and Insurance Agent. Public activities: Treas. Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj 1943-46; was chairman Arya Yuvuk Mundal; sec. Crematorium Comm.; sec. Seva Samaj Sch.; mem. Tvl. Bajpatra Assn. and auditor. Address: 374 Cowie St., Pretoria. MOHAMMED, Ismail (M. I. Maithir); b. Durban, 1922; s. 0. S. Maithir; educ. Woodlands Indian High School; m.; 2 s., 3 d. Bus.: Trading as Mahumane Trading Store, 481 Berg St., Pmburg.; Mandiza Super Store, P.O. Eston; Mandiza Trading Co., 482 Berg St., Pmburg. Interest: Sport, philately and tropical fish. Address: Bus., 481 Berg St.; Res., 531 Pieter- maritz St., Pmburg.

---

## Page 14

130 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO MITHA, Parbhoo, general merchant; b. Surat, India, May 18, 1910; s. of Mitha Naran of Surat, India; educ. in India, private studies; m. Rathanben, d. of Rama Jivan, of Surat, India; 2 s., 2 d. Joined father’s bus. on arrival from India, 1924, now controls one of the leading Indian wholesale fruit establishments in Johannesburg. Pub. act.: Chairman, Educational Council of the Patidar Soc., Johannesburg. Has visited India several times. Address: Res. and bus., 40 President St., Johannesburg, Phone 330258. PARBHOO MITHA FAMILY — ’ BY MITHA, Rathanben; b. Surat, India; 2nd d. _of Rama Jivan, of Surat, India; educ.: Private studies; m. Mitha Parbhoo; 2 s., 2 d. Pub. act.: Interested in life and affairs of Patidar community. Rec.: Needle- work. MITHA, Khoosal, general merchant; b. Surat, India, May 25, 1918; s. of Mitha Naran, of Johannesburg; educ.: Private studies in India; m. Laduben, d. of Koovarjee Parbhoo, of Grahamstown, 2s. 2 d. Partnered brother’s bus. as the firm of P. Mitha. Pub. act.: Active member of Patidar Soc., Johannes- burg. Takes active interest in progress and advance- ment of Indian community. Interest, literature. MITHA, Suleman Amod, merchant; b. Stanger, Sept., 1996; s. o. Amod Mitha; educ. Stanger Govt.- aided Ind. Sch.; m. lysha, e. d. o. late I. Mohamed of India; 1 d. Bus.: estd. bus. in 1922; trading in partnership with his uncle; estd. own bus. in 1939; trading as Amod Mitha & Sons, whlsle. mecehts. Pub. activities: Trus. of Stanger Islamic Mad- ressa Soc.; interested in all affairs concern- ing the community in the district; went on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1945. Recreation: Reading and gardening. Address: Bus., P.O. Box 38, Stanger, Phone 16; Res., 214 Couper St., Stanger. MOHIDEEN, Tajoodeen Goolam, merchant; b. 1919, Pmb.; educ. Woodlands High Sch.; m. Kathija, d. o. M. L. Sultan of Durban; was assoc. with the firm Saiboo’s Fruit Store, 1935-38; later estd: another business trading as “Spice Centre,” Public activities: Official Nizamia Muslim Soc., 1938-53, now trus.; also official of several football and cricket clubs; staunch religious worker and generous donor to charitable organisations. Recrea- tion: Motoring. Address: 476 Church St., Pmb., Phone 25282. MOHAMED, _ Hajee Omar, whol. mercht.; b. Ranavar, India, 1909; 2nd s. 0. Hajee M. Joosub; — educ. Marine College, Dbn.; m. d. o. late Essa Hassim of Pretoria; 2 s., 8d. Bus.: Was director of M. H. Joosub (Pty.) Ltd.; now sole prop. o iMessrs. O. H. Mohamed, whlsle. and soft gds. mchts. Pub. act.: Jt. hon. secty. Transvaal Ind. Org.; treas. S. M. Nana Memorial Trust. Add.: 23 Commissioner St., Box 1622; 14 Orient St.. Phone 337908. . THE SOUTH AFRICAN MOHANLAL, Ram- jibith, merchant; b. at Clairwood, Natal, 1922; s.o. G. R. John; educ. Clairwood Govt. Ind. Sen. Boys’ Sch. and M. L, Sultan Tech. College, Clair- wood branch; m. 2nd d. o. Mrs. Rama- dhar of Umzinto; 4 s. 2 d.; after leaving sch. was assoc. with father’s bus.; became dirctr of G. R. John’s Supply Store (Pty.) Ltd., in 1949; in 1956, was sole proprietor; trading as John’s Sup- ply Store. Public activities: Was a mem. of the Yuvuk Arya Samaj (CWD); was comm. mem. of the Natal Indian Congress (CWD branch); foundation mem. and patron Dayals F.C.; patron Springbok F.C.; Yorks C.C.; Premier Angling Club; Mayfair Orchestra. Recreation: Sports. Address: 152 Dayal Rd., Clairwood, Natal, Phone 81116. MOMLA, Mohamed Suleman, merchant; b. Vereenig- ing, 1931; e. s. of Suleman Momla, of Vereeniging; m. Maymoona; 2nd d. of Ahmed Desai, of Cathedral Rd., Durban; educ. Vereeniging Ind. Sch.; estd. dry- cleaning bus. in Mayerton. Public activities: Mem. of many well known societies; keenly interested in the affairs of the Indian community. Recreation: Fish- ing, reading, motor mechanic. Address: Bus., Mayer- ton Drycleaners, P.O. Box 12, Mayerton; Res., 21 As. Baz. Vereeniging, Transvaal, MOODLEY, Chenglryan Soobiah, fruit merchant; b. Germiston, Jan. 3, 1909; 6th s. of Chenglryan Mood- ley; educ. Tigerskloof Native Sch. and Sithoor Madras, India; m. d. of M. Pillay, of Dundee; 3 s., 3 d.; estd. own bus. in 1927, now engaged in whole- sale fruit bus. Public activities: Pres. T.I.C., Benoni branch; Benoni H.Y.M.A.; adviser to Tamil Sch. Brd.; founder of the Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha; chair. of the Asiatic Advisory Liaison Comm.; princp]. delegate to S.A.H.M.S. conference in 1952; former sec. of Indo European Joint Council; chairman of the Joint Advisory Comm. Indian, Coloured; chairman of the Parent Teachers’ Assn.; founder of the Thirukootam Prayer classes; organiser of the Kural classes; was pres. of the East Rand F.A. for 18 years; delegate to the S.A.LF.A.; founder and life vice-pres. Eastern Transvaal Inter-race Soccer Board; vice-pres. of the T.I.F.A.; life mem. of the Good-Hope C.C.; Violet T.C.; Benoni Thistle F.C.; performs religious cere- monies and fees collected are utilised for the further- ance of vernacular educ. in Benoni; vice-pres. Federa- tion of Tamil Organisations in the Tvl.; treas. Tvl. Tamil Benefit Soc. Recreation: Reading. Address: Res., Stand 49, 3rd St., Benoni, Tvl., Phone 541544. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 131 MOODLEY, Chinnien Gopaul, b. Pietermaritzburg, Jan. 31, 1911; 3 s., 1 d.; educ. Woodlands Indian High School, Pietermaritzburg; joined “The Leader” in 1941. Public activities: Was vice-pres. Social Fraternity Club, Hindu Youth Club; sec., vice-pres. and exec. mem. Maritzburg Indian Poor Relief Society; sec. and clerk of first Maritzburg Indian Parliamentary Debating Society; sec. Maritzburg Ind. Health and Strength Club, Higher Grade School F.C. and C.C.; Maritzburg and Natal Indian Referees’ Assn. (now hon. life vice-pres.); Councillor, Maritz- burg District and Maritzburg County Ind. Football Associations; exec. mem. Natal Indian Football Assoc.; sec. fund-raising committee Maritzburg Indian Child Welfare Society; hon. inspector and sec. to the Board of Control, Aryan Benevolent Soc.; Councillor Maritzburg Indian Technical Institute; mem. of Commission which reframed constitutions of Child Welfare and Benevolent Societies. Address: Res., 8 Gertrude St., Pietermaritzburg. MOODLEY, Chin- samy Kolanoasamy, businessman; b. at Stanger, 1914; s. 0. K. Moonsamy of Shakaskraal; educ. at Tinley Manor Govt.- aided Ind. Sch.; m. d. o. M. S. Moodley, of Durban; 2 s., 1 d. Bus.: Dealer in live- stock and produce and commission agt.; was in the teaching profession for a period of nine years before entering bus. Pub. activities: Secty. and trus, the Shakas- kraal and Dist. Ind. Sch. Society; sec. of Shakas- kraal Ind. Sch. Meals Comm.; joint hon. sec. of the Ramakrishna Centre; former sec. of the N.LC.; joint hon. sec. Shakaskraal and Dist. Indian Assoc.; former sec. of the Shakaskraal Sporting and Welfare Soc.; supervisor of Stanger and Dist. Indian Child Welfare Soc.; ex-chairman of the Melville Hindu Saraswathi Sungam; ex-sec. of the Melville I.F.C. Address: P.O. Shakaskraal, Natal. MOODLEY, Goorsamy Ruthnam, fruit merchant; trading as Prospect Fresh Produce, Benoni Ave., Benoni; b. Benoni, Dec. 31, 1920; s. of Goorsamy Moodley; educ. Benoni Govt. Ind. School; m. Sukunthala, 5th d. of late V. S. Pillay, of Ladysmith; 4 s., 1 d.; estd. Prospect Products Distributors, Benoni. Public activities: Sec. and trust. Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha since its inception; treas. Far East Rand Football Assn., also selector; ex-pres. Azad C.C.; ex- sec. and mem. Tamil School Board; treas. S.A. T.B. Assn. (non-European branch), Benoni; highly res- pected member of Benoni Indian community; plays prominent part in welfare of youth of the community. Recreation: Sport. Address: No. 5 6th St., Asiatic Bazaar, Benont, Phone 54[277.

---

## Page 15

132 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO MOODLEY, Govindasamy Narainsamy, farmer; b. Verulam, 1891; e. s. of late N. Moodley, of Verulam, educ. at Verulam Ind. School; m. Sinthamani, d. of late Murugan, of Tongaat; 4s. 4 d.; after a period of private employment took up cane farming. Public activities: Mem. of the Cane Growers’ Assn.; mem. of the Verulam Temple; mem. of the New-Glasgow Indian School Board. Recreation: Sport. Address: Res., New-Glasgow, P.O. Box 28, Verulam, Natal. MOODLEY, Kanagambal, student nurse; b. Durban, May 5, 1939; 2nd d. of late V. Moodley, of Durban; educ. Indian Girls High School, Durban; took up nursing after leaving school in 1956. Public activities: Mem. Red Cross Society; passed First Aid and Home Nursing in 1953. Hobbies: Music, netball, tennis, pen pals. Address: Res., 55 Sentinel Ave., Green- wood Park, Durban, Phone 836271. MOODLEY, Karrupan Govindsamy, b. Durban, August 23, 1926; 2nd s. of Karrupan, of Sezela; m. Paravatchee, d. of P. Moodley, of 127 Victoria St., Durban; 1 s., 3 d.; educ. A.Y.S. Govt.-aided Indian School, Mayville; also passed the senior J.C. exams. in 1945; joined King Edward VIII Hosp. 1948. Public activities: Mem. Lifesavers Swimming Club; Leaguers Physical Club; F.O.S.A. (Springfield branch); takes keen interest in the affairs of the Ind. people. Recrea- tion: Swimming, boxing, angling. Address: Res., 17 Salvia Rd., Springfield, Durban. MOODLEY, Lutch- manan Singarum, printer; b. 1920, Pmburg.; educ. York Rd. Govt. Ind. Sch. Public activities: fndr. and secty, M.I.T.SS., 1940-1958; was secty. and pres. of Tech- nical F.C.; was secty. Springbok T.C.; and secty. M.I.R.A.; was secty Pmburg. Indian Poor Relief Society: fndr. and first record clerk Midlands Ind. Lawn Tennis Assn., 1950; has been dele- gate to M.LL.T.A.; was appointed sec. in 1954, held the position until 1957 and later resigned; was sec. M.D.I-F.A. and sec. N.LF.A. 1954; was again appointed sec. in 1955 of M.D.LF.A. and held dual position as sec. and vice- pres.; vice-pres M.D.1.F.A. 1956-57, in 1958 was made hon. life vice-pres. for the outstanding services rendered to the assn.; delegate to N.I.F.A.; delegate to N.N.LF.A.; delegate to N.I-L.T.A.; council mem. Aryan Benevolent Society; council mem. Maritzburg Indian Child Welfare Society; founder and _first record clerk Natal Darts Union; mem. Denver D.C.; delegate to M. & D.D.U.; delegate to S.A.LR.A. 1955; council mem. M.C.I.F.A. 1956, and also mem. Mis- conduct Board 1956-57; was sec. of Appeal Board N.LE.A. 1954; was sec. Appeal Board M.D.1F.A. 1949-53; mem. of Appeal Board Natal Darts Union; chairman Appeal Board N.N.I.F.A.; council mem. Maritzburg Indian Sports Assn.; sec. Pietermaritzburg Inter-race Soccer Board; vice-pres. Deepavali Cheer Society; mem. Ramakrishna Centre of S.A. (Pieter- maritzburg branch); was sec. Siva Soobramoniar and Mariaman Temple 1945; was sec. H.Y.M.A. 1945-47 and then served as council mem. and again as sec. in 1953; was selector N.I-F.A. under 21, 1951-54, 1958 was again appointed and also served as chairman of the comm. 1954 and 1958; has been a juvenile selector of M.D.1.F.A. for many years and also as chairman; was manager of the N.I.F.A. under 21 team 1953, 1954; was manager of the M.D.I.F.A. Inter-Town juvenile team 1950, 1953; was manager of the Inter- Town Darts team of Maritzburg 1956; captain of the Denver Darts Club “B” team 1958; council mem. Natal Indian Referees’ Assn. 1954-58; was chairman of the Bursary Board of the M.I.T.S.S. 1956-57; was acting sec. of the Natal Ind. C.U. 1947-48; council mem, M.D.1LC.U. 1944-58: was sec. M.ILC.C. 1943-50; pres. Natalians C.C. 1955-57; captain Natalians C.C. 1957-58; delegate to N.J.C.U. 1955-57; was sec. F.O.8.A. 1950-53 and also record clerk. Recreation: Sports. Address: 510 Longmarket St., Pietermaritz- burg. Natal. ——— MOODLEY, Kasava- loo Kuwpana, Leather worker; b. 1908, Pmburg.; e.s.o. Mrs. K. Moodley, of Pmb.; educ. York Rd. High Sch.; m. d. of B. Pil- lay of Durban; 2 s., 2 dj; employed at Eddels Ltd., for the last 34 years; now Forman; Public Act.: Mem. H. Y.M.A.; Mem. Siva Subramo- niar Temple and Pmb. Lawn Tennis Club. An ardent worker for the Tamil Cultures. Rec.: Ang- ling. Add.: 498 Loop St., Pietermaritzburg. MOODLEY, Manicom, land and estate agent; b. Malvern, July 10, 1904; 3rd s. of Moonsamy Mood- ley, of Malvern; m. Constance, 2nd d. of Joseph Lazarus, of Durban; 2 s., 1 d.; &duc. Malvern Govt.- aided Indian Sch.; joined his brother in bus. in Ross- burgh; later estd. bus. as a produce dealer in Warwick Ave.; now operating a land and estate agency in Valbro Chambers. Public activities: Mem. of the Malvern F.C.; takes interest in the affairs of the Ind. community. Recreation: Soccer. Address: Bus., 18 Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 62900; Res., 37 Old Dutch Rd., Dbn., Phone 67231. a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 133 MOODLEY, Kisten Periasami, furniture manufacturer and shop fitter; b. Durban 1899; educ, St. Aidan’s Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. d. of P. K. Moodley; 6 s., 6 d. Bus.: Estd. bus. 1920, trading at 100 Middleton Rd., Escombe, Natal; also farms in the district. Pub. act.: Was mem. N.I.C.; was trus. Malvern Sch.; mem. F.O.S.A.; ex-pres. Malvern Ind. Sch. Sports Comm.; patron Malvern Ind. F.C. Rec.: Hunting. Add.: 100 Middleton Rd., Malvern, Natal. MOODLEY, Meenatchiammal; b. Durban, 1905; d. of K. Moodley; educ. St. Aidan’s Sch., Durban; m. K. P. Moodley; 6 s., 6 d. Associated with the religious and other cultural activities in the district. Address: 100 Middleton Rd., Malvern, Natal.

---

## Page 16

134 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO MOODLEY, Madu- ray Goorasamy (M. G. Moodley), fore- man, leather industry; b. Pmburg.; 5s. 0. Maduray Moodley; educ. Woodlands Ind. High Sch.; 2 s., 4 d. Pub. act.: Capt. Natal in charity match against Tvl. in 1946; repres. N. Natal in Sam China Tourna- ment 1945 to 1955; 14 years selected in- tertown Pmburg.; selected for S.A. in 1945 against C. Col.; selected intertown cricket against Durban; playing mem. for M.LL.T.C.; sec, M.LR. Ass.; mem. W.O.B.C.; one of the founders of the Divine Life Society, Pietermaritzburg, serving as sec. since inception from 1956; Counc. H.Y.M.A. 1951-53; exec. mem. S.A. Divine Life Society. Rec- reation: Gardening. Address: 17 Gertrude St., Pieter- maritzburg, Phone 29031. MOODLEY, Mala, cinema mngr.; s.o. A. S. Moodley; m. Ges- sina, d. o. C. Meyers; 6 s., 2 d.; educ. Nadar High Sch., Porayar, Madras, India. Pub. act.: Studied music (violin) in India; seoty. e. C.LC., Port Elizabeth ae branch; assoc. with sport since 1919; councillor E.P.I.F.A.; repres. this body at S.A.LF.A. from 1941- 1950; pres. S.A.LF.A. 1951-52-53; selector for Federation mtchs. and team to tour India 1951-53; councillor repst. S.A.LF.A. to S.A. Soccer Federation 1953-54; pres. and hon. life vice- pres. of E.P. Soccer Federation and hon. life vice- pres. of Cape Quadrangular LF.A.; founder and past pres. and hon. life vice-pres. of E.P. Referees’ Assn.; was pres. E.P.I.F.A. for 14 years, of which 11 years were consecutive; hon. life vice-pres. and founder of E.P.I. Sports Ground Assoc.; founder and hon. life vice-pres. of Daffodils F.A.; founder and hon. life vice-pres. of Daffodils C.C., ex-treas. and vice-pres. EP. Cricket Union; councillor S.A. Ind. C.U, Bus.: Director of Alpha Theatres; was connected with the fishing industry and trading as A. Ganas & Sons; also prop. of Carlton Fruiterers. Address: 39 Chapel St., Port Elizabeth, Phone 23766. MOODLEY, Mayappen Olaganathan; b. Durban, March 15, 1934; e. s. of late Mayappen Moodley; m. Angeline, d. of Jack Nadasen; 1 d.; worked as clerk, shop asst., bookkeeper, then joined King Edward VIII Hosp.; intends to further studies. Recreation: Cricket, soccer, films. Address: King Edward VIII Hosp.; Res., 171 Coedmore Rd., Bellair, Durban. MOODLEY, Moon- samy Ramsamy; busi- nessman; b. May 5, 1913, in Durban, Natal; s. of Moon- samy Moodley; educ. Depot Rd. Govt. Sch., Durban; m. Manikam, d. of Kistappa Mood- ley, of Clare Estate; 3s. 6 d. Business: Gen. dealer and fresh prod. (Servis Stores), est. 1949; previously employed at Bakers Ltd., Naval Stores, Merebank & District Co-op., of which he was a director and sole founder. Public activities: Asst. sec. Merebank Ratepayers’ Assn.; treas. Merebank Thrift Club; pres. and ex-sec. Merebank Tamil Sch. Society; patron Merebank F.C.; com. mem. Merebank Ind. Assn. Recreation: Tennis. Address: Bus., 284 Grey Street, Durban; Res., 9 Haskins Road, Merebank, Natal. MOODLEY, Moon- samy Kristma, cart- age contr.; b. Dbn., 1895; o. s. of late Moonsamy Moodley; educ. Pmburg. and Higher Grade Govt. ind. Sch., Dbn. After a service of pvt. em- ployment, started own bus. as cart. contr. in 1918; has developed it into the leading Ind. bus. as cart. contr. in Dbn.; prop. of the International Deliv- ery Co., cart, contrs. Public activities: A pioneer _ trade and labour organiser and joint sec. of the Indian Workers Union, Industrial Workers 6f the World, 1917 branches which have now been absorbed in the trade union movements of the country; keen kennel enthusiast, being an exhibitor of wire-hair fox terriers, winning numerous first prizes, including the South African Championship with the wire-hair bitch Princess Dulesia as well as in Rhodesia Open Cham- pionship. Address: 406 Jan Smuts Highway, Durban; Bus., Hoosens Bldg., 116 Queen St.. Durban. THE SOUTH AFRICAN MOODLEY, Nadara- jan, inspector Eddels Footwear Industry; b. Oct. 20, 1929, Pieter- maritzburg; s. o. P. V. Moodley (ex-C.LD.); educ. St. Pauls and Woodlands High Sch. and took Matric equivalent at Tech. Institute. Bus.: Musi- cal director for Star Record Co., Durban; responsible for re- cordings in Vernacu- lar Christian lyrics for the first time in S.A.; appeared in ; ; many theatrical shows in aid of charitable institutions 1947; sec. of the Kalaivani Orchestra (prize-winning band) which rendered musical items on the occasion of the Royal visit 1949; an official of the Leather Workers’ Union 1951-55; mem. S.A. Red Cross Soc.; ordained Deacon of the Obededom Temple; Obededom Branch School Superintendant; patron Colonials F.C.; played soccer for same club; has travelled extensively in the Union. Address: 481 Boom St., Pietermaritzburg. MOODLEY, Ram, farmer; b. in Maritzburg, 1905; s. of late Valoo Moodley, of Pietermaritzburg; educ. at St. Anthony’s Sch., Maritzburg; m. Salatchee, d. of late P. Pather, of Durban; 4 s., 5 d.; after leaving school, started farming at Inchanga. Public activities: Mem. of Tamil Vedic Soc.; takes an active part in the affairs of the community. Recreation: Reading. Address: P.O. Inchanga, Natal. MOODLEY, Ramiah, farmer; b. in Verulam, 1914; e. s. of G. N. Moodley, of Verulam; educ. at New- Glasgow Indian Sch.; m. 3rd d. of late Mr. Pillay, of Tongaat; 4 d.; after leaving sch. assisted father in farming; visited India in 1952; on return from India went in for cane farming. Public activities: Mem. of the Cane Growers’ Assn. Recreation: Angling and swimming. Address: Box 28, Verulam, Natal. MOODLEY, Sava- bathy Ganesa, B.A., sictr.; b. 1917; educ. N.U.C.; attorneys; teacher at several Ind Sch., 1937-1948; served articles with P. M. Krishna & Co. & Geo. Singh & Co. Public activities: Pres. Pmburg. Dist. Ind. F.A., 1956; served on Misconduct Board, N.LF.A., 1954-55-56. Add.: Bus., Medina Bldgs., 480 Church St, P.O. Box 685, Pmburg; res. 561 Berg St., Pmburg. INDIAN WHO’S WHO 135 MOODLEY, Soobramoney Moonsamy, B.A.; vice- principal Welbedacht Ind. Sch.; b. Welbedacht, 1916- s. of M. Moodley; educ. Sastri College; m. Maru- gathambal; 3 s., 4 d. Public activities: Ex-pres., now hon. life vice-pres. of Goodwill Club; pres. Welbe- dacht Tamil Sch. Comm.; ex-pres. Welbedacht Rover Crew; ex-sec. Welbedacht and Dist. Ind. Soc.; pres. Welbedacht F.C.; interested in child welfare. Recrea- tion: Table tennis and debating society. Address: Box 1, Cavendish, Natal. MOODLEY, Savabathy Narainsamy, clerk; 6. Malvern, 1922; 2nd s. of N. Moodley; educ. at Clairwood Govt.-aided Ind. School; after a period of private employment joined the firm of City Agencies & Estate Companies as a clerk. Public activities: Mem. of the Rossburgh Dart Club; assoc. with several public bodies. Recreation: Soccer. Address: Bus., 18 Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria St., Durban, Phone 819813; Res., 134 Sarnia Rd., Rossburgh, Durban. MOODLEY, S. M., salesman, Pickles Wholesalers, Smith St., Durban. Address: 247 Park Station Rd., Greenwood Park, Durban, Phone 832543. MOODLEY, Devanai, d. o. R. Moodley of Greenwood Park; m. Visvalingam, s. 0. M. Chinnasamy, Howick; 4 8. educ. Umgeni Sch., Dbn.; b. 1924, Durban; was teacher (Vernacular) at Cor- onation Krishna Sen- tamil Sch., 1938; also conducted sch. at Kenville, Durban and Howick; staged sev. shows in aid of Tamil schls.; mem. Howick Women’s Inst.; fndr. of Sunday Prayer Group. Rec.: Sewing, Tamil literature. Address: 274 Curry’s Post, Howick, Natal. MOODLEY, Visvalingam Chinnasamy, gen. mercht.; b. Howick, 1920; s. of M. Chinasamy, of Howick; educ. Howick Sch.; m. Devanai, d. of R. Moodley, of Greenwood Park, Durban; 4 s. Bus.: On leaving sch. assisted father with wattle contracting bus.; also in private employment for a period, (Hubert Davies Rhodesia); later estd. own business; held several official positions on various public bodies connected with the welfare of the Ind. community. Recreation: Carpentry and bricklaying, photography. Address: 274 Curry’s Post, Howick, Natal.

---

## Page 17

136 THE SOUTH AFRICAN MOOLA, Amod Ma: homed, company dir., b. Umzinto, Natal, 1909; 2nd s. o. M. S. Moola; educ. Um- zinto; took up com- mercial career in 1924; joined the firm of Lockhat Bros. & Co., Ltd., in 1927; is now director as well as director of its Assoc. Companies; controls his own family bus. of whlsle. mehts, trading as Ma- homed Ismail & Ce. at 12 Albert St., Dbn.; entered public life in 1939; was closely associated with the late Mr. A. I. Kajee; pres. S.A.I.O.; held important positions in the Indian political bodies and has played an important roll in the Indian educational and social developments of the community; at present is manager of four of the largest Indian schools in Durban; has played an important roll in the establishment of the M. L. Sultan Technical College; trustee of the Indian Medical Services Trust; was responsible for bringing about arrangement between the Medical Trust and the Anglican Church for the control and management of the St. Aidan’s Indian Hospital; has brought about sound reforms among the Muslim community, urging them to give up extravagant customs and to direct their energies and resources to things that are lasting and rewarding; was awarded the Coronation Medal by the Queen in recognition of his services to the community; exec. mem. of the Orient Club. Recrea- tion; Billiards and snooker. Clubs: Orient and Inter- national Clubs. Address: Bus., 104 Commercial Rd., Dbn.; Res., 162 Clarence Rd., Durban. MOOLA, Ebrahim Ahmed, gen. dealer; b. Khator, India, 1910; e. s. o. Mrs. and late Mr. E. Moola of India; educ. India and Dbn.; m. Hafez, d. o. Mr. and Mrs. H. Allibhai; 6 s. 5 d. Bus.: After leaving sch. in 1925, estd. bus. at Howick; trading as A. E. Moola’s. Pub. act.: Was chairman Howick Madressa asst. - secty., subse- quently vice-chair- man; mem. Howick Sch. Building Fund. Recreation: Fishing. Address: 38 Main St., Howick, Natal, Box 3. Mosque, 1946-47, also _ INDIAN WHO’S WHO MOOLA, Dawood Essop, garage propr.; b. in Stanger, 1919; s. 0. E. Moola (town councillor); educ. at Stanger Govt.-aided Indian School and Sastri College, Dbn.; m. Hawa, d. o. S. I. Asmall of Durban; 2 s., 2 d. Bus.: Prop. of Planters Garage and Moola’s Garage; estd. bus. on a small scale and today it is one of the leading firms in Natal; also engaged in retreading services trading under __ the style of Planters Tyre Services. Public activities: Keenly interested in cricket; rep. Lower Tugela and Inter-district I-C.U. in representative matches; coun- cil mem. N.LC.U. Recreation: Fishing and_ sport. Address: Bus. and Res., 41 Stanger, Phone 191. MOOLLA, Essop Ma- homed, director of companies; b. Khol- vad, India, 1896; s. of Mahomed Moolla; educ. Stanger Govt. Ind. Sch.; m. Amina Bibi, y. d. of late A. M. Mather, of Stan- ger; 11 s., 4 d. Busi- ness: 1918, general dealer’s business in Stanger; 1921, Kears- ney Supply Stores (Pty.), Ltd., at Kears- ney; 1930, Silver Stream Trading Co. (Pty.), Ltd., Kranskop; 1950, Mercantile Agencies, Stanger; began Moola’s Garage and Planters’ Garage, Stanger, now run by his son. Pub- lic activities: Member of the Stanger Town Board in 1944; ever since the creation of a Borough at Stanger he has been serving as a Councillor except for one year; aS a present Councillor he is a mem. of the Finance Com., Public Works, Electricity & Water, & Gen. Purposes Com.; chair. Indian Housing Scheme; com. of oaths, Lower Tugela ,Dist.; chair. Stanger Indian Educ. Board; foundation’ mem. and former sec., chairman and trustee of the Stanger Madressa Anjuman Islam; served on several fund-raising com- mittees, including the Governor-General’s Fund; interested in all public activities in the district dealing with religious, educational, social and _ cultural matters. Recreation: Reading. Address: Bus. and Res., 52 Rood St., Phone 202, Box 180, Stanger. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 137 MOOLA, Ismail Amod Hajee, general merchant and garage proprietor; b. Stanger, July 20, 1909; s. of Amod Moola; m. Zulekha, d. of A. M. Sarang, Dundee; 2 s., 5 d.; educ. Stanger Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; came to Glencoe from Stanger in 1935 and formed the {st Glencoe Muslim Society; com. mem. Glencoe Islamic Society; official of Glencoe Mosque and Madressa; treas. of the socty. in 1940; played soccer for Schools, Stanger; toured Mecca, India and Pakistan in 1947; a res. figure and official of the Glencoe Mosque and Madressa Trust 1941. Recrea- tion: Motoring. Address: P.O. Box 78, 127 Biggar St., Glencoe, Phone 78. MOOLA, Moosa Suleman, clerk; b. Clairwood, Aug. 27, 1933; e. s. of S. M. Moola; m. Rabia, d. of Cassim Patel, of Stanger; educ. Ahmedia Govt.- aided Ind. School, Mayville; worked for M. M. Kadwa, of Durban; later joined Mills Distributors S.A. (Pty.), Ltd., 20 Commercial Rd., Durban, from Jan., 1953. Public activities: Mem. Orient Fishing Club, Royal Tennis Club, Wide World Brotherhood of Eng.; interested in pen pals world over. Recrea- tion: Tennis, pen pals, fishing, philately, swimming, tropical fish, cricket. Address: Res., Flat 4, 50 Queen St., Durban; Bus., 20 Commercia] Rd., Durban. MOOLOO, = Ramlal, b. Natal, 1890; educ. Pretoria Coloured Government School. Bus.: General agent, proprietor Delhi Res- taurant, Market Sq., Pretoria. Public act.: Repstd. Hindi section at Mahatma Gandhi's first passive resistance movement meeting at the Pretoria Mosque, 1907; repstd. Pretoria at the first South African Congress Con- ference in Johannes- burg; comm. mem. of the Pretoria Indian Defence Association; comm. mem. of the Transvaal non-European Poll Tax Committee (Pretoria Branch); repstd. Pretoria at presentation address to Hon. J. H. Thomas, Colonial Secretary, at Pretoria; founder and secty., Pretoria Indian Market Assn.; founder and ex-secty., joint secty. (1938) Transvaal Ind. Congress, Pretoria; repstd. Transvaal at the South African Indian Congress; joint secty., Pretoria Indian Hospital Committee; presented to H.R.H. Prince George as vice-presdt., Transvaal Indian Congress at Johannes- burg; vice-presdt., Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj, Pre- toria Branch. Sports: First played for Orleans F.C., then Pretorians F.C. and played last for Pirates F.C.; played cricket for Pretorians; repstd. Pretoria District on several occasions; became pres. Pretoria District Indian F.A.; vice-presdt., Pretorian Indian F.C.; ex- presdt., now vice-presdt., Transvaal Indian F.A.; tepstd. Transvaal Indian F.A. as delegate to the South African F.A.; selection committee member, Transvaal Indian F.A., 1930; S.A.LF.A. tournament, Transvaal manager, 1932; selection committee All- India Tour, 1934. Address: Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. MOOLLEN, Edgar, land and estate agt.; 4th s. of late Robert Moolen; Durban merchant; b. Durban, Sept. I4, 1919; educ. Depot Rd. and Sastri Coll, Durban. After leaving college in 1936, worked at Five Roses Tea Factory for 4 years, then started own business, trading as Edgar Moolen & Co., Land and Estate Agent. Public activities: Was a keen soccerite and r represented Durban in 1936; capt. Stella junior team for 3 years; founda- tion mem. and sec.-treas. of Silverton F.C. for 5 years; played for Durban Central Tennis Club and Ramblers C.C. Recreation: Sport. Address: Bus., Room 5, Ajmal Mansions, 86b Victoria St., Phone 60431, Durban; Res., 409 Randles Rd., Sydenham, Durban. AP! MOOPANAR, | Kist- nan Aiavoo, farmer; b. Durban, 1892; m. Toolsuammah, d. of Doraisamy Chetty of Durban. After work- ing in Durban for some time, moved to Umzinto where he is now farming. Public activities: Trustee Siva Soobramoniar Temple, mem. FOSA (Umzinto area), vice-pres. Um- zinto Child Welfare Society, secy. Esper- anza-Sezela Ind. Mill Group; closely assoc. with the development of the sugar industry on the South Coast. Visited India in 1948; was a keen soccerite in his younger days. Address: P.O. Umzinto, Natal. MOONILAL, Morty, garage proprietor; b. 1913, Umzinto, Natal, e. s. of A. Moonilal; educ. at the Cato Manor Govt.-aided Ind. Sch.; m. d. of Mr. Mahado of Verulam, 3 d. After leaving school quali- fied for the Senior Ind, Teachers’ Certificate and T.4: commenced teaching in 1930; served as teacher at Cato Manor, Sir Kurma Reddi, Fairbreeze and Depot Road Govt.-aided Ind. schools, After 16 years of service as teacher entered business as proprietor of

---

## Page 18

138 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO Hepple Bus Service; estd. another business, trading as the International Distributors, dealing in motor spares; later estd. the A.B.C. Service Station. Public activities: Grantee of the M. L. Sultan Govt.-aided and Platoon schools at Avoca; patron and vice-presdt. of the Durban Indian Life Savers’ Club; patron Natal Indian Lawn T.A.; travelled extensively in Europe and Africa. Address: Bus., 83-85 Albert St. Durban; Res., 175 Randles Rd., Mayville, Durban. MOOSA, Haijee Essa, merchant; b. Vhaloo, Broach, India, 1889; 4th s. of late Essa Vally; educ. in India; 1s, { d.; came to S.A. 1902, settled in Cape Town; estd. fruiterers’ bus., trading under the name of Moosa Essa, wholesale fruit merchant; also general dealer, and importer and commission agent. Public activities: Worked actively for the establishment of the Madressa and Khanumiya Mosque; did valuable work in S.A. on behalf of the Muslim Patel Assoc. of Bombay; visited India and Mecca in 1955. Address: Res., 22 Muir St., Phone 20414, Cape Town; Bus., 8 Muir St., Cape Town. MOOSA, Yusuf Motala, b. P.E. 1912, s. of A. M. Motala; m. Amina, d. of late Allie Goder; 2 s.; after a period of private employment, opened own bus. in Woodstock, now wholesale egg merchant, being the largest establishment in the Cape Province. Public activities: Mem. of social organisations. Address: Mera-Kismet, Tennant Rd., Crawford, Cape Town. MOOSA, Haj. Amina Allie, clerk, Salt River, Cape Town; b. May 9, 1926; d. of late Hajee Allie Goder; educ. Salt River; m. Yusuf Moosa; was assoc. with father’s business; now assist- ing husband in busi- ness. Public activities: Keenly interested in the welfare of the Muslim community, actively engaged in the advancement of Muslim religion. Rec: Singing. Address: Mera Kismet, Crawford, Tennant Rd., Cape Town. MORAR, Narsing, merchant and hairdresser; b. Sarbhon, dist. Surat, Bombay; e. s. of Morar Jagga; educ. Uitenhage and Cape Town; m. Ponsra; D 8, 1d. After leaving school took over father’s business, trading under the name of M. Jagga & Sons. Public activities: Was Sec. of Mahasuria Shabhittya Vardac Mandal, now vice-chairman; was a foundation mem. of the above Mandal at Uitenhage; mem. of Cape Hindu Cricket Club, also captain of Cape Hindu cricket team. Rec.: Sports. Address: Bus., 95 Albert Rd., Woodstock; Res., Voortrekker Rd., Maitland East, Cape Town. MORAR, Jasmatbhai, general dealer, b. Telalpor, India; s. of late Gosaibhai Morar; educ. India; m. Pemmi, d. of R. Visram; 1 s., 7 d. Bus.: Was assoc. with father’s business since 1918, now in partnership with brother; mem. E.L. Hindu Soc.; visited India 1922, 1928, 1936, 1946. Address: 62 Bayswater Rd., East London, Phone 3988. MORARJEE, Dullabhbhai; general dealer; b. Cho- visi Talooka, Navsari, India, in 1915; s. of Morarbhai Ratanjee; educ. in Johannesburg; m. Duvaliben, d. of Naran Parbhoo; 2 s., 3 d. Business: Ratanjee’s Cash Store, est. in 1936. Came to South Africa in 1920 and settled in Johannesburg. Ex-treas. and present chair- man of Transvaal United Mochi Society. Address: 85 Mint Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. MORGAN, Rajoo, general dealer; b. Grahamstown, 1930; s. of M. Dorasamy; educ. Trafalgar High Sch., Cape Town; m. Dhanalutchmee, d. of P. Pillay; 1 s., 1d. On leaving school started commercial agency, later estd. general dealers’ bus., trading as Crystal Variety Stores. Public activities: Mem. Alma Bridge Club. Rec.: Motoring. Address: Bus. and Res., 234 Albert Rd., Woodstock, Phone 51647, P.O. Box 1579, Cape Town. MOTALA, Dr. Mahomed Moosa; b. 1921, Dundee; educ. Sastri College, Wil- son Coll. & Grant Medical Coll., Bom- bay. Public activi- ties: Joined N.LC. 1949: pres. of Pmb. Branch; mem. Ind. Centenary Comm.; was chair. of Fosa. Pmb. Branch; prac- tising at Pmb. Add- ress: Boom St., Pmb. MOTI, Jagiivan, general dealer; b. Johannesburg, on Dec, 11, 1915; s. of Moti Bhikha; educ. in Johannes- burg; m. Jakarben, d. of Narsi Jivan; 3s. 3 d. Business: Joined father’s business in 1936; since settled in Heidelberg, trading as J. Moti & Heidelberg Tailors & Outfitters. Address: 61a Voortrekker St., Heidelberg, Transvaal; Phone 207. MOTLEKAR, Kassim Mohamed, general dealer; b. Kimberley, 12-11-1928; s. of A. R. Motlekar; educ. Moslem Sch., Kimberley. Bus.: Trading as A. R. Motlekar & Sons from 1949; branches, Cassim’s Trading Store 1951, M.B. Sores 1955. Public activities: Sec. Ind. Moslem Educ. Soc., founded by father, A. R. Motlekar; sec. Kimberley Ind. Mosque. Address: 47 Popham St., Kimberley, Phone 1207. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 139 Pinetown. MOTALA, Amod Mahomed; salesman; b. Durban, Jan. 11, 1916; e. s. of Mr. M. A. Motala of Durban; m. d. of Mr. and Mrs. Moosa Vanker of Mander- ston, Natal; four d.; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban. After leaving school joined his father’s business as salesman M. A. Motala (Pty.), Ltd., 494 West Street, Durban. Keen on cricket and tennis. Address: 494 West Street, Durban. MOTALA, Abdulwahab; company director; b, Dur- ban, Feb. 5, 1928; 5th s. of M. A. Motala of Durban; m. d. of Mr. Y. A. Jadwat of Newcastle; 1 s., 1 d5 educ. Sastri College and M. L. Sultan Tech. College, Durban. After leaving college was admitted as partner in father’s business, trading as M. A. Motala (Pty.), Ltd., 494 West Street, Durban. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 494 West Street, phone 20196, Dur- ban; Res., 50 Ascot Street, phone 23200, Durban, Natal. THE M. A. MOTALA FAMILY MOTALA, late Mahomed Ahmed; b. Kathor, India, 1889; educ. Kathor. On arrival in S.A. settled in Durban. Was in private employment. Estd. own business as outfitter in West Street with branches in Field Street, trading as M. A. Motala (Pty.) Ltd., Silver Shoe Store, Field Street. Pub. act.: Actively connected with many public bodies. Donated the Motala Hall in memory of his parents, for vernacular and English school, now State-aided. Was the second largest donor to Sastri College Building Fund; vice-chairman of the Orient Club; donor of the Motala Lads Hostel at MOTALA, Abdul Haque; company director; b. Durban, May 5, 1922; 3rd s. of M. A. Motala of Durban; m. d. of Mrs. and late Mr. Mulla, of Umlaas; 1 s.; educ. St. Anthony’s Govt.-Aided Indian School and Sastri College, Durban. Joined his father’s business after leaving college, now director of Silver Shoe Store, cnr. Field St. and Commercial Rd., Durban. Keen on all forms of sport. Rec.: Chess. Add.: Bus., 97 Field St., phone 22421, Durban; Res., 50 Ascot St., phone 23200, Durban, Natal. MOTALA, Hajee Yusuf Mahomed; company director; b. Durban, April 26, 1932; 6th s. of M. A. Motala of Durban; educ. Sastri College, Durban. After leaving college joined his father in business, of which he is now a director, trading as Silver Shoe Store, corner Field Street and Commercial Road, Durban. Has been on pilgrimage to Mecca. Rec.: Tennis and cricket. Address: Bus., 95-97 Field Street, phone 22421, Durban; Res., 50 Ascot Street, phone 23200, Durban, Natal. MOTALA, Abdulla Mahomed; b. Durban, Nov. 15, 1939; y. s. of M. A. Motala of Durban; educ. at St. Anthony’s Govt.-aided Indian School, now at Natal. M. L. Sultan Technical College, Durban. Keen on sport. Add.: 50 Ascot Street, phone 23200, Durban,

---

## Page 19

140 THE SOUTH AFRICAN MOTALA, Saleh Moosa,___ bookkeeper; b. Durban, July 19, 1904; e. s. of late Moosa Saleh Motala; formerly of Dundee; m. d. of late C. A. Meer, formerly of Waschbank; 7 s., 1 d.; educ. Dundee and Durban. Bookkeeper, with business connec- tions in Northern Dis- tricts. Public activities: First sec. N.C. (Dun- dee and Dist. Branch), sec. Moslem Madressa for the past 20 years and chairman for 3 years; chairman of Ind, Ratepayers’ Assn., Dundee; sec. Mosque Madressa-E-Islamia Trust, Dundee, since 1930. Address: 32 Ann St., Dundee, Phone 292. MOTTIAR, Ahmed Dada, gen. merchant; b. Ranavav, India; e. s. of Dada Kahn Ma- homed of Ranavav; educ. Ranavav & pte. studies; m. Mariam, d. of Ayob Kurtha of Ranavav; 7 s., 5 d. After a period of pte. employment, estd. a commission agency in 1919; opened a whole- sale bus. in 1926, trading as Mottiar’s Commercial Agency; estd.a clothing factory in Pietersburg in 1935; transferred to Jhb. in 1936; managing director of Capital Clothing Company. Visited Europe in 1931. Public activities: Was a comm. mem. T.I-C. Address: Bus., 4 Adam’s Arc., Johannesburg, Phone 331130; Res., corner Park Rd., 40 Market St., Johannesburg, Phone 237703. MUDELIAR, Natsen Shumoogam, b. Ladysmith, 1908; s. of C. N. Mudeliar; educ, Ladysmith Govt. Ind. Sch., now known as Windsor High Sch.; m. d. of S. D. Moodley; 4 s., 2 d. Public activities: Played for Klip River District Ind. F.A.; played against All- India in 1934; foundation mem. of Siegetown Tennis Club; hon. sec. Young Hindu Service Society; hon. sec. Hindu Thirkootam and Shree Ganser Temple; helped to raise funds for bursaries for local scholars; hon. sec. Ladysmith Deepavali Celebration Comm. and comm mem. since its inauguration; comm. mem. Ind. Child Welfare Soc.; assisted with the collection of funds for numerous Benevolent Societies; was hon. assist. sec. Northern District Ind. Cricket Union; was hon. sec. Klip River District Ind. F.A. Address: Res., 292a Murchison St., Phone 875, Ladysmith. INDIAN WHO’S WHO MUKADAM, Mohamed Hoosain, merchant; b. Tudil, Kolaba, India, 1915; y. s. of late Hajee Mohamed Ebrahim Mukadam; educ. India and Cape Town; m. Rabia, d. of F. Abdurahman, of Tudil, India; 1 s., 3 d.; estd. own bus. in 1923, trading as M. Hoosain. Public activities: Mem. Cape Ind. Con- gress, mem. Habibyia Educ. Inst., mem. Cape Ind. Traders’ Assn., mem. Muslim League. Address: Klip- fontein Rd., Athlone, Cape Town, Phone 61026. MULLA, Abdul Hamid, B.A., LL.B.; b. Greytown, Natal; s. of Mr. Ismail Mulla of Greytown; m. to Fatima Vawda, d. of Mr. I. D. Vawda of Dannhauser, Natal; 3 s.; educ, at Greytown and Sastri College, Durban; first Indian to qualify for the B.A., LL.B degrees in S.A. and the first non- European to attend the Witwatersrand Univer- sity; was head prefect at Sastri College; qualified to practise as an advocate, now practises as an attorney and notary public of the Natal Prov. Div. of S.A.; whilst at the university, took part in all activities organised by the college; was sec. of the Law Students’ Soc. for three consecutive years; comm. mem. Liberal Party, Natal Coastal Region; comm. mem. of the Uni- versity Debating Soc.; sec. of the International Rela- tions Study Circle; comm. mem. of the Bantu Study Soc.; was Ist non-European to repst. the university at the National Union of S.A. Students’ Conference held at Cape Town in 1938; executive mem. N.LO.; was sec, of the Orient Club for four years; while at Sch. took an active part in sport. Rec.: Tennis. Address: Bus., 118 Grey St., Durban, Phone 28557; Res., 204 Cowey Rd., Durban, Phone 39995. MULLAH, Goolam Mahomed, tailor and merchant; b. Pinetown, Sept. 5, 1932; 6th s. of Suleman Cassim of Durban; educ. Pinetown G.A.J. Sch.; served as an apprentice at Parshothams of Grey St.; later opened bus. at 104 Lakhani Chmbrs and at Valbro Chmbrs., trading as Continental Clothing Mnfrs. Public act.: Takes keen interest in the affairs of the Indian com- munity. Rec.: Angling. Address: Bus., 42 Valbro Chmbrs., 115 Victoria St.; Res., 72 Sheringam Rd., Overport, Phone 885341. MULLAJEE, Ismail, merchant; b. Cape Town, 1928; s. of A. Mullajee; educ. Trafalgar High Sch., Cape Town. After a period of private employment estd. own bus. in 1950 at 11th Ave.{ Windermere, later appointed director _G.B. Bazaar \(Pty.) Ltd.; mem. Habibiya Moslem Educational Inst.; executive mem. Hidayatul-Islam Mosque, Kensington; mem. of Orient Sport Club; takes keen interest in religious and Islamic matters. Rec.: Cricket, football, table tennis. Address: Bus., 11th Ave., 3rd St., Windermere, Cape Town, Phone 54870; Res., 4th Ave., 14th St., Ken- sington, Cape Town, Phone 55814. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 141 MUNSAMY, Chinnakanu Ramsami, farmer and com- pany director; b. Feb., 1898, Verulam, Natal; s. of Ramsami; educ. Wesleyan Indian School, Umhloti; m. Muniamah, d. of Ramsamy, of Ploughland, Veru- Jam; after her death married Lutchmamah, d. of Lutchmayiah Naidoo, Isnembe; 4 s., 7 d. Business: Sugar cane farming in 1924; ex-clerk of Waterson Bros. Public activities: Founder of Spitkop Govt- Aided Indian School; chairman Spitkop School Board; director of Pakco (Pty.), Ltd., Verulam. Recre- ation: Gardening. Address: Bus., Phone 118. Box 65, Verulam; Res., High Street, Tongaat, Natal. MUNSAMY, Chin- nappen, schoolmaster; educ. Stella Hill Govt- aid. Ind. Sch.; at pre- sent at Moongalam Govt. Aid. Ind. Sch. Commenced _ teaching at Stella Hill Govt.- aided Ind. Sch., 1929; transferred to Malvern Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. 1933; transferred to Stella Hill Govt.-aided Ind. Schl. 1937; trans- ferred to Hindu Tamil Inst. Govt.-aided Ind. Sch. 1943; chairman Cato Manor Care Committee (FOS A) 1945-47; mem. Durban Ind, Child Welfare Soc.; mem. Durban Ind. Benevolent Soc., one of its foundation members and its first sec., Cato Ind. Educ. Soc., which owns River View Govt-aided Ind. Sch.; Assistant Div. Commissioner, Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ Assn.; played soccer for Stella Hill Ind. Sch. F.C. 1920: joined Mayville District Indian F.C. as a delegate for Stella Hill F.C. 1929; record clerk for Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1931; vice-presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1932-47; manager Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. team that toured Transvaal in 1938; delegate to Natal Ind. F.A., repst. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1940- 55, manager Central team All-India Cup tournament, presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1941; chairman May- ville Dist. Ind. F.A., Protest, Misconduct and Enquiry Board, 1945-1947; elected hon. life vice-prestd. May- ville Dist. Ind. F.A. 1948; delegate S.A. Ind. F.A., reprst. Natal Ind. F.A. 1945-54; mem. Overseas Comm. S.A.I.F.A. 1947-1954; presdt. Durban and Dist. Ind. Sch. F.A. 1951-52; delegate to S.A. Soccer Federation, repst. S.LF.A., 1951-54; mem. Appeal Board N.LF.A. 1946-49; presdt. N.I-F.A. 1952-53; trust. Mayville Dist. Ind. Sports Ground Assn., hon. life vice-presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. C.U., hon. life vice-presdt, Inter-Dist. Ind. C.U.; presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. Sports Ground Assn; presdt. Mayville Dist. Ind. Cricket Union; Presdt. Durban and Dist. Ind. Sch. Athletic Union; presdt. Clairwood and Dist. Sch. Sports Council. Address: 66 Pastoral Rd., Overport, Durban. MUNSHI, Ahmed Ahmood, general agent and secre- tary of companies; b. Surat, India, Aug. 31, 1918; €. s. of late Mahmood Ameermia Munshi; educ. Sir J. J. High School, Surat, India; m. Ayesha Bibi, €2 d. of Mohamed Moorad of Kathor, India; 2 s., 6 d. After leaving school joined the firm of Amod Jajbhoy (estate agents); later was in partnership, trading under style of M. E. Seedat Munshi & Co.; is now sole proprietor. Is keenly interested in general welfare of Indians. Rec.: Motoring. Address: 9 Adam’s Are., 40 Market St., P.O. Box 8886, Phone 337785, Johan- nesburg; Res., 23e 18th St., Vrededorp, Phone 355924, Johannesburg. MURUGAN, Durma- lingam (Frank), farmer & cartage contractor; b. La Mercy, Natal, August 22, 1918; educ. J.C.; m. d. of late S, Pandaram, of Veru- lam; 2d. 1s. Bus: Estd. cartage contrac- tors’ bus., trading as Frank’s Cartage Con- tractors at Chaka’s Kraal, Natal; estd. taxi bus. 1937; also » farms in the dist.: 3 patron Rama Krishna Centre of Chaka’s Kraal branch. Address: L £2 D. Murugan, P.O. Chaka’s Kraal, Natal, Phone 90 Umhlali. MUTHAYAN, Visvanathan, banana merchant; b. 1930, P.E.; s. of late R. Muthayan; educ. Hindu Sch., P.E.; was assoc. with late father in bus., later took over sole control, trading as E.P. Banana Wholesalers, one of the largest importers of bananas from Natal. Address: 15 South Beach terr., South End, Port Elizabeth, Phone 23466. MUTHUKISINA, Purushotmanmuth, B.A., LEB., Wits.; Diploma in Ind. Philosophy, Benares; played a prominent part in Student activities at Wits. Add.: Box 91, Stanger, Natal. MUTHUKISTNA, Pam, Attorney; educ. N.U.C.; only Indian woman practising law in S.A. Add.: P.O. Box 91, Stanger. NAICKER, Moorgan Shunmugam; secretary of com- panies and public bookkeeper; b. July 4, 1918, Sea View, Natal; y. s. of Moorgan Naicker; educ. Sea View Ind. School; m. Visalatchie, d. of late Muthoo Padayachee, Newcastle; 1 s., 5 d. Business: Sec. of companies and public bookkeeper. He has secured the following certificates: Fellow of the Association of Commercial Science, Fellow of the Inst. of Commerce, Diploma, School of Accountancy. Public activities: Mem. Durban International Club; hon. auditor Vishnu Temple, Sea View; South Indian Musical Assoc.; patron Thirrukural Soc. of Durban. Recrea- tion: Gardening, radio and music. Address: Bus., Phone 27080, 23 Valbro Chambers, Victoria Street, Durban; Res., Phone 819282, 118 Railway Road, Sea View, Durban.

---

