# Southern Africa Indian Who's Who (1971-72)

**Book ID:** southern-africa-whos-who-1971-pt9
**Total Pages:** 20

---

## Page 1

292 ROOPNARAIN, Harripersadh: Director of Companies. b. 26th October, 1922, Inanda, Natal. Educated: Inanda and Sastri College. Qualified: Motor Engineering (M. L. Sultan Technical College) Dale Carnegie Graduate; Son of Roopnarain of Inanda and grandson of Ramlagan, first Indian raw sugar miller in Natal. Has made remarkable in roads into Transport business. Was Director of Phoenix- Inanda Transport Co., H. Roopnarain’s Transport. Also in Insurance field. Activities: Patron and Founder of Inanda Youth Movement (Established 1933) now known as Inanda Indian Welfare Society; Patron: Red Hill F. C.; Chairman: Inanda Bus Owners Association since 1955. One of founders of unique transport joint ventures — Phoenix-Inanda Transport Co., Rec.: Sports; Married: Dasanda, daughter of E. Kalika of P. M. Burg; S 3; D 1. Res. Add.: 23 Bailey Road, Red Hill — Phone: 837975. 4S ROOPSINGH, Chanderdeep Nell- singh: Farm Manager. b. 6th Dec., 1933, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Shakaskraal and Stanger High. Eldest son of Nellsingh Roop- singh of Shakaskraal and grandson of Baboo Roopsingh of Komrie, U.P., India. Manages consortium of farms in the Lower Tugela area for the Roopsingh family. Takes a keen interest in all Educational, Charitable and Social matters affecting community. Is an Execu- tive Member: Roopsingh Religious and Educational Trust; Vice Chair- man: Kadha Roopsingh Parent/Teachers Association; Patron: Merebank Dharma Satsangh; Executive Member: Melville Natal Indian Sugar. Growers Association; Rep. for Melville to the Central Committee — The Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Patron: Groutville United F/C; Executive Member: Melville Non-European Mill Group Board; Sports: Table Tennis and Soccer; Rec.: Travel and Music, Married: Suminthra; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Shakas- kraal — Phone: 20; Res. Add.: Estate Shakaskraal — Phone: 3830, Umhlali. a THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO RUSTOMJEE, Rustomjee Jal- bhay: District Manager. b. 231d January, 1927, Bombay, India. Edu.: St. Xaviers, Bombay; St. Anthonys and Sastri College of Surgeons & Physicians (Edin- burgh); Trinity College, Dublin. Son of Jalbhay Rustomjee. Ori- gin: Bombay, India. Entered ins. field, 1948. Now District Manager — Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd. Travel: India, U.K., Europe, Scan- dinavian countries, Middle East and African countries. Activities: Trustee: R. K. Khan Hospital & Dispensary Trust; Rustomjee Jivanjee Gorcoodoo Trust; Jorbhay Rustomjee Trust; Chairman: Finance Committee, D.I.C.W. Society; Councillor: Centenary Committee Trust; Past Member: St. Aidans Hospital Board of Management. Rec.: Travel. Married: Dr. Khorshed Ginwalla of Durban; S 3; Bus. Add.: 1st Floor, 140 Queen Street, Durban — Phone: 29807/28513; Res. Add.: 6 Nerina Road, Asher- ville, Durban — Phone: 885104. eS} ROYKER, Hajee Abdul Kader Omar: Businessman. b. March, 1914, Morba, Kolaba, Bombay, India. Edu.: Morba and Athlone — Cape Province. Eldest son of Omar Royker. Origin: Morba, India. Was associated with family concern from 1927 — Omar Roy- ker & Sons. Established own busi- ness — Royker’s Supply Stores — 1938; Stadium Supply Store — 1952; Roymo Meat Suppliers — 1963; Rybell Meat Market — 1970. Interested in all Religious, Cultural and Educational matters affecting his community. Founded Al Hazar Madressa, 1964. Activities: Is a keen worker in the Social and Cultural fields. Member: and Office bearer of various organisations. Well-known Cape Town businessman. Travel: Middle East. India. East Africa; Rec.: Classical Music (Quusidas); Married: Hajee Latifa, daughter of Shaik Hassan Thakey of Morba, India; S 5; D 4; Bus. Add.: Klipfontein Road, Belgravia, Athlone — Phone: 64805. Res. Add.: Klipfontein Road, Belgravia, Athlone — Phone: 64805. “THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO” Make use of them. j advertising pages reach men at the top. i f e THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ! Ss SAEED, Mohamed Aaref Ahmed: : Businessman. b. 14th November, 1939, Richmond, Natal. Educated: Richmond Indian School. Eldest son of Ahmed Saeed. Origin: Rander. Manager: Ahmed Saeed & Ahmed Saeed & Sons, Richmond. Interested in all local activities. Secretary: Richmond Sports Club; Richmond Indian Rate-payers Association; Young Men’s Muslim Association; Secretary and Trea- surer: Richmond Muslim Madressa Trust. Past Secretary: Richmond Indian Social Club; Plays League Cricket; Married: S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 47, Rich-- mond, Natal — Phone: 45; Res. Add.: Russell Street, Richmond, Natal — Phone 199. SAIB, Cassim Mohamed: Businessman and Sportsman: b. 3rd May, 1921, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School. Son of Mahomed Saib of Stanger, Natal and Madras, India. Proprietor: Central Meat Supply, Stanger. Past Manager of Islamic Butchery, Stanger. Keen Sports- man rep. Lower Tugela F/A and Lower T/C/A; Rep. Capt.: L/T/C/C and Inter-Dist. C/C 1948/52. Office Bearer and 293 Del.: L/T/F/A and L/T/C/C to Inter Dists. and Natal. Interested in Social work. Member: Rate-payers Asso., Stanger. Rec.: Fishing; Married: S 3; D 2. Bus. Add.: 94 Couper Street, Stanger — Phone: 107; Res. Add.: 6 Ridge Road, Stanger, Natal. I¢s7] SALEH, Abdul Razak: Representative. b. 7th November, 1928, Panderi, District Ratnagiri, India. Educated: Pan- deri, St. Pauls — Rondebosch and Rosmead Schools. Son of Essop Saleh. Origin: Panderi, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1940. Joined family business — St. Mathews Butchery — 1947. Was in the Insurance field — S. A. Mutual (1950/53). Shell Oil Col — 1963/66. Is at present with Universal Conf. — Cape Town, from 1969. Activities: W/Executive Member: Orient Sports Club; Promotor — All-in Wrestling — Razzak Promotions; Executive Member and Past Secretary: Habibia Educational Institute; Exec. Member: Habibia Orphanage; Chairman: Ittihaad Educa- tional Society; Vice Chairman: Rylands Civic Association; Founder: Condor Amateur Weight Lifting Club. Keen Welfare Worker. Is a Member of Rylands Police Reservists under the S.A.P. — Athlone. Sports: Wrestling and Body Building. Married: Fathima, daughter of Omar Moosa of Cape Town; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: Universal Confectionary, 7th Avenue, Maitland, Cape Province; Res. Add.: 23 Murton Road, Rylands Estate, Athlone. PERK HEME IKKE x 14S SAMAN, Soobramoney: Born at Golden Valley in the Um- zinto District in 1916. He came of poor parents and at the age of eight began. life as a tea picker at a .Tea Estate in Inverugie. His father also worked for the tea estate. There were ten children in the family — Soobramoney (Joe) was the eldest. For his work in the fields Joe was paid the princely sum of 25 cents per month! The closing down of the Tea Estate in 1928 was a blessing in disguise. The family moved to Farm Rock where they farmed in market produce. It also meant schooling for the children. Joe, however, only went up to Standard One. The family’s financial position even then could not afford further schooling. From 1930 he was an ordinary cane worker and by 1934 he began as a Caddy master on a golf course at Umdoni Park. His salary was R3,50 per month rising to R16,00 by 1944. That was the year of decision as far as Joe was concerned, Insurance drew him like a magnet. At first he did field collecting and canvassing on a commission basis and by 1950 he became DHE SA BL HE HH HL ERI BE HE BE HK BE HE IE A, SEH HEL EHH HH XE HE I BE HK HK XE HE EB BE HE HE EB HE HBB HEH HE HEH BH HE HE BB HE HO HO BO The Saman Family BER SENA EERE AEE RE XE IK IK XE I BA BEI BK BA RHE HH HEE HH BH HEH BMH BE HEU BBE BB BX BH HBB BH HU BH MOB BI HEH I DE XE PERE KEKE REE KEK a salaried man — earning over R150,00 per month. In 1963, he gained his first promotion — he was now a full representative. [t was about the same time when he gained his Diploma in Insurance Writing. His cup was full when was made District Manager in 1965. It tells of remarkable progress in the face of adversity. Joe’s life was not all easy. It shows what hard work, personal sacrifice and applica- tion can achieve. Joe’s address is P.O. Box 54, Phone: 405, Umzinto, Natal. Res. Add.: Off Main Road, Umzinto, Natal. 14S SAMAN, Annam: Housewife; Wife of Soobramoney Saman. Daughter of P. Moodley of Dumisa, Natal.

---

## Page 2

294 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO | THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 295 EI IA IA EEDA BE EDA BEI ME 9 BDI ID I BOE HE BKK BKK IKI BK HE BA HE HB RBH BH BL HI HE | 4 The , . Hoosen Saib Family SHIR EXE IE IH EI I IH HEHEHE HOEHEHEHE HEH I I HOE I BH BABI BH HE HOEHEHE HEHE III PBB HEHE HHO HOEHOEHOHE HEH HB SH BD HEH HB OK The Saleh Mohamed Family IK HEE SEE HE HE KE EEK SOE REFERER HH HH AE HEHEHE )UeS” WoO Hoosein Saib was born in 1867 at Fairbreeze and farmed in the district of Lower Tugela. Little is known of the activities and early struggles of the father of Hussein Saib, but this much is certain. The pioneer of the family probab- ly arrived in the sixty’s and settled in the Fairbreeze area where he bought a farm. This initial acreage was extended by his son, Hoosen Saib, and after his death in 1933, the Estate was run jointly by the Saib Brothers and in 1950 the Estate was divided amongst the seven sons. Besides farming, he also ran a trading store (Hussein Saib & Son) which is now known as Topshop Store at Fairbreeze. The business was established in 1921. An indefatigable worker for the community at large, he was Trustee of the Tongaat Habibia Mosque, Trustee of the Estate late Raj Mohamed and Chairman of the Fairbreeze Indian School Committee. He was also patron of the Fairbreeze School Sporting Club and held these posts until his death at the early age of fifty seven. \% &( MOHAMED, Hoosen Saib: Farmer and Businessman; b. 1901 at Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Fair- breeze Govt. Aided School. Farmed and traded jointly with his brothers until 1955 when the partnership was dissolved. Took 3 sons into business and traded as Topshop Store. He died in 1956. He was a Trustee of the Tongaat Muslim Society and the Fairbreeze Madressa and a Member of the Fairbreeze Indian School Com. and the Fairbreeze Sport- ing Club; He was also Treasurer of the Tongaat Indian Mill Group and a member of the Natal.Indian Cane Growers Association. \4eo2 SHAIK, Ghouse Saib: Businessman and Farmer; b. 5th April, 1931 at Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Indian School and Tongaat High. Son of Mohamed Hussein Saib. Trading in Fairbreeze, Maidstone, under the name of Topshop Stores and associated in farming ventures with brothers (Fairbreeze Estates & Amod Bros.) In the Ton- gaat and Lower Tugela areas. Is a member of the Tonguaat Muslim Society the Fairbreeze Madressa and the Tongaat Indian Mill Group. League Cricketer. Rec.: Motoring; Married: Swalaha M. Ramatulla of Pinetown: S 1; 1 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 12, Maidstone — Phone: 28; Res. Add.: Fairbreeze, Maidstone — Phone: 28. \EG3 SHAIK, Akbar Saib: Businessman and Farmer. b. 29th January, 1929 at Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Govt. Aided School and Tongaat High School. Second son of Mohamed Hussein. Runs own butchery (Fairview Butchery) and is associated in farming venture (Fairbreeze Estates & Amod Bros.) in the district of Tongaat and Lower Tugela. Activities: Secretary: Tongaat Young Men’s Muslim Society; Fairbreeze Victoria Angling Club; Sports: League . Cricket and Tennis. Rec.: Angling and Soccer. Married: Tahera Shaikmodeen of Maidstone; S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 12, Maidstone — Phone: 122, Tongaat; Res. Add.: Fairbreeze, Maidstone — Phone: 28. rear SHAIK, Amod Sahib: Director of Companies and Business- man. b. 24th May, 1924 at Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Indian School and Sastri College. Eldest son of Mohamed Hussein. Garage Owner in Ton- gaat (Tongaat Garage and Service Station) and farming jointly with brothers in the district of Tongaat and Lower Tugela. Is a Trustee of the Fairbreeze Madressa Trust and the Tongaat Muslim Society. Member: Tongaat Indian Mill Group. Keen Sportsman — Plays League Cricket and Tennis; Rec.: Angling and Travel. Married: Fathima Hoosen Shah of Stanger; § 2; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 67, Tongaat, Phone: 7; Res. Add.: Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Phone: 28. \ 4 a_i of Johannesburg HAJEE, Saleh Mohamed: F.R.E.S., F. Com. Sc. A.; F.I.C.; F.1.B.A. Com. of Oaths Sworn Translator of the Supreme Court of South Africa. b. Dec., 1901. Educated: Self Taught. Fourth son of Late Hajee Abdulla, pioneer businessman of Durban. Public Accountant and General Agent. Established own business — Saleh Mohamed — 1926. General Agent, Administrator of Estates, Secre- tary of Companies. Public Book- keeper, Broker, Business Consul- tant, etc. Director: Central Trust; Globe Commercial and Industrial Corporation. Sworn Translator — English, Urdu and Gujarati (T.P.D.). Was Hon. General Secretary: Memon Educational and Welfare Soc., (1934/55); Vice President: Memon Association (1963/ 69). Associated with Muslim Brigade Movement in South Africa since 1930. Brigadier. Married: Halia, daughter of Osman Soomar of Durban; Rec.: Islamic Literature, Youth Movement. Widely travelled. Bus. Add.: 24 Market Street, P. O. Box 6206, Phone: 8344729/8344047/8383301; Res. Add.: 30 Mare Street, Roodepoort — Phn. 7631067. ABDUL, Haque Saleh Mohamed: Businessman. b. 25th August, 1942, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Educated: Roode- poort Govt. School. Son of Saleh Mohamed. First joined family concern Saleh Mohamed — 1959. Director (1965). Was previously with Singer Sewing Machines — Cape Town. Was also Director ~ Commercial Traders. Interests: Religious Literature and Travel. Keen Judo Enthusiast — was Member of Red Dragon Chinese Judo Institute; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 6207, Johannesburg; Phone: 8344729/8344047/8383301. Res. Add.: 50 Mare Street, Roodepoort — Phone: 7631067. bGGa] FAROUK, Saleh Mohamed: b. 2nd March, 1947, Johan- nesburg. Educated: Roodepoort Govt. School. Eight son of Hajee Saleh Mohamed of Johannesburg. Businessman. Director — Saleh Mohamed, Central Trust and Globe Commercial and Industrial Corp. Activities. Manager: Hi- Lite Music Entertainers. Interests: All literature, Music, Travel. Travelled Rhodesia, P.E.A. and Republic of S.A. Joined family concern. 1466

---

## Page 3

296 +4 ‘WES SALEJEE, Ahmed (Dajee): Busi- nessman. b. 1915, Alipur, India. Educated: Johannesburg Indian School. Son of Salejee Asmaljee Dajee. Origin: Alipur, India. Joined family concern of S. A. Silk Store (Salejee Asmaljee), 1933. At pre- sent Sole Proprietor of business. Activities: Past Committee Mem.: Alipur Muslim Trust. Widely travelled. Rec.: All Sports. Married: Fathima, daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. Ismail A. Loo- nat of Johannesburg; S 3; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 33299; 39 Maddison Street, Johannesburg — Phone: 243354; Res. Add.: Jeppestown, Johannesburg — Phone: 243354. eI SAMANNA, Applesamy (Roy): Hotel Manager and Licen- cee. b. 4th November, 1937, Mayville, Durban, Natal. Educated: Booth Road Indian School and Ahmedia, Mayville. Son of V. Samanna of Mayville, Durban and Madras, India. Was previously connected with Claridges — 1958/63. Manager of Royal Hotel, 1964. Is a Liquor Licencee. Takes a keen interest in all local Sports and Social activities. Other Activities: Member: Cato Manor Tempie; Clairwood Tamil Old Boys Institute; S. Afri- can Tamil Convention; Isipingo Hill Rate-payers Asso.; Chairman: Isipingo Darts Club; Royal Darts and Billiards Club; Manager: Woopsy F/Club. Is the youngest Indian Hotel Liquor Licencee in South Africa. Married: Manor- THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO t many, daughter of Mrs. and the Late Mr. Y. A. Reddy of Asherville, Durban; D 2; Bus. Add.: Royal Hotel, Isipingo Rail, Phone: 91329; Res. Add.: Royal Hotel, Old Main Road, Isipingo Rail — Phone: 91329. ENO SAMUEL, James: School Princi- pal. b. Sth January, 1897, Durban. Natal. Educated: St. Aidans, Dbn. Eldest son of Mr. and Mrs. S. Samuel of Durban, Natal. Quali- fied at St. Aidan’s College. Began teaching career in 1913 as Assist. master at same school. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. Keen Sportsman: Soccer, Cricket and Tennis. Acts.: Was first Hon. Sec.: St. Aidans F/C; Captained Umzinto F/C; Was President: Umzinto F/C for several years. Active Cricketer — Syden- ham and Pirates C/C. Played for Natal Indian Teachers XI. Interested in ail matters affecting the community. Assisted in formation of Umzinto Indian Society, was its first Secretary..Was an Executive Member of various bodies and delegations. Was Org. Secretary of Welcome Recep- tions to Mrs. Sarojini Naidoo and the Hon. V.S.C. Sastri at Umzinto. Cel. Golden Wedding — 9th July, 1971. Hobbies: Music and Reading; Married: Mary Agnes, second daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Paul of Umzinto; S 4; D 2. Res. Add.: Kelso Road, Umzinto, Natal. 3 SEE BHI HE KE HE RE EK HEE KE 111 SARJU, Ramlal: Businessman. b. 2nd January, 1924, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: St. Pauls Govt. Aided School. Son of S. Sarju (Sookhai). Was at one time factory Worker (Leather Industry). Joined Baking trade in the forty’s and ran own taxis from 1945. Retail Business, 1954 (Slangs- pruit Stores) and eventually Reject Shoe Centre in 1968. Stillruns own taxi business — Ramlal’s Taxi Service. Acts.: Council Member: Raisethorp Arya Samaj; Member and Treasurer: City Indian Taxi Owners’ Association, Was Treasurer: Mohini Orchestra (1943/53); Member: Raise- thorp Rate-payers’ Association; Married: Ramallie, daughter of K. Sookdeo of Slangspruit, Pietermaritzburg; S 1; Bus.. Add.: 192 Khan Road, Raisethorp — Phone: 41026. The Sarju Family of Pietermaritzburg BR IK IK SA IAI IRB BRE HE HEH HEH NH BEI IB BB BB BE HE HE 9H BB BB HH HEHE HEHE HB BI I I BX BB BA BB BHI HI OBE IB I FRE HEHEHE EE IEE RE \QTV2 RAMALLIE, Ramlal: Wife of Ramlal Sarju; Businesswo- man. b. 17th April, 1931, Slangspruit, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: Sutherlands Govt. Aided Indian School. Manageress — Reject Shoe Centre. Other Activities: Sec.: Raisethorp Arya Samaj (Women’s Branch). Interested in all Welfare and Social work. Travel: P.E.A., Republic of South Africa. Wr RAMESH, Ramlal: b. 10th May, 1950, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: Sutherlands Govt. Aided and Woodlands High. Eldest son of Ramlal Sarju of Pietermaritzburg Fourth year Medical Student — Lucknow University, India. Interests: Soccer, Music and Cricket. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO i SAMUEL, Nee A j: Teacher, b. 16th March, 1901, St. Thomas Mount, Madras, India. Educated: Higher Grade Govt. School, Pietermaritzburg. Son of John Michael Samuel of Madras, India. Joined teaching profesgion in 1923 at Stanger State Indian Govt, School. Long service of forty unbroken years. Joined Carlisle Street Govt. School for period of four years — 1935 to 1939. Church Organist — 1929/1962 — Catholic Church, Stanger. Acts.: Played Soccer during early days for Pietermaritzburg Schools F/C; Tennis Champion — Stanger, 1921/24. Captain of Stanger Tennis Club, 1924, Shows keen interest in all Social and Charitable Organisations; Married: Lily Antonia Simon of Stanger; S 4; D 3. Res. Add.: Mather’s Mansions, Rood Street, Stanger — Phone: 458. 44S SARUPEN, Ramdas: Businessman. b. 16th September, 1928, Cam- perdown, Natal. Educated: Thorn- ville and Woodlands High School, Pietermaritzburg. Son of R. Saru- pen, Camperdown, Natal. Well- known figure in local business and Social circles, Camperdown and District. Sole proprietor: Camper- down Motor Transport — estab. 1942. Takes a keen interest in all matters affecting community. Committee Member: Vedaram Sabha (P. M. Burg); Shree Vishnu Temple; Midlands Republican Festival Committee (1966); Midlands Soil Festival; Mem.: Educational Committee Thornville State Aided Indian School. Trustee: P. M. Burg and District Hindu Burial Society; Thornville Indian School Society; Was Active Soccerite. Rep. P. M. Burg County, 1957/58. Rec.: Ang- ling, Gardening and Photography. Married: Yashoda, d/o R. R. Maharaj of Pietermaritzburg; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 5, Camperdown, Natal — Phone: 63; Res. Add.: Main Richmond Road, Thornville, Natal. EG SAYED, Mohamed: Company Secretary.and Social Work- er. b. 3rd January, 1914, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Late Sayed Hoosen of Ghala, District Surat, India. Attached to R. E. C. Supermarket and C & D Wholesalers as Company Secretary. Keen Social and Religious Worker in the district of Verulam. Activities: Secretary and Life Trustee: Saberia Jahengri Charitable Trust (Durban); Chairman: North Coast Non-European Railway Passenger Welfare Association; Vice President and Executive Member: Verulam Clinic Board 1964/67; Representative Verulam F.0.S.A. — Link (Verulam Branch); Committee Member: Verulam Young Mens Muslim Society; Member: Verulam Madressa Koovathe Islam. Is an office-bearer of numerous other organisations. Rec.: Soccer; Married: S 4;D 4; Bus. Add.: 584 North Coast Road, Greenwood Park, Durban; hone: 834127; Res. Add.: 14 Court Lane, Verulam, atal Phone: 242. 297 14-979 SEEDAT, Abdool Hack: Businessman (L.A.C.); b. 15th April, 1929, Durban, Natal. Educated: Clairwood Senior Boys and Sastri College. Son of Hoosen Seedat, pioneer businessman of Clairwood and Kathor, District Surat, India. Popular businessman — Clairwood area. Traded as Seedat’s Seven. Other Activities: Member: Local Affairs Committee — Isipingo Rail. Elected 1967/68. Active in various Social, Religious, Educational and Sports organisa- tions. Past President and Vice President: Clairwood Old Boys Club; Teacher/Parent Association — Tagore; Hon. Life Vice President: South Coast Cricket Union; Com. Member: Isipingo Primary School Educational Board; Vice President: Isipingo Indian Society; Committee Mem.: Isipingo Football Association; Isipingo Ratepayers Asso.; Isipingo Moslem League; Keen Cricketer. Captained Clair- wood Old Boys Cricket Club; Bus. Add.: 7 Jacobs Road, Clairwood — Phone: 81216, Durban; Res. Add.: 27 Palm Road, Isipingo Hills. 47g SEEDAT, Mahomed Moosa: Businessman. b. 2nd April, 1928, Durban, Natal. Educated: Centenary Road Govt. Indian School. Son of Late Moosa Mahomed Seedat of Durban, Natal and Kathor, India. Began commercial career in 1946 in Durban with family retail business of M. M. Seedat. Moved to Stanger, 1953 and opened own business as Sidsons. Takes great interest in communal affairs. Deeply religious. Popular figure in local circles; Married: S 4; D 4; Rec.: Camping, Fishing; Bus. Add.: 65 Reynolds Street, Phone: 248, Stanger; Res. Add.: 9 Hill Crescent, Stanger, Natal. 4A SEETHAL, Sewpersadh Mungel: Life Assurance Agent. b. Durban, Natal. Educated: St. Aidans Boys School. Son of M. Seethal. Re- signed from teaching profession to take up Life Assurance in 1943 as agent for National Mutual Life Assurance of Canada Ap- pointed District Manager, Sun Life Assurance, 1955. Head of the Sth leading Sun Life Assurance Co. unit in the world. Is a Member of the Million Dollar — Round Table he f> (Headquarters Chicago — Exclu. Membership — only 6000 in the world). Attended Round Table Conference at Lausonne, Switzerland, June, 1967, where leading reps. from all over the world were present. Has travelled extensively — Europe, U.K., U.S., and Canada. Privileged to be guest of Metropolitian, New York, World’s largest Insurance Co. Married: Silvia Freda, daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. W. S. Seethal of Durban; S 1; D 5; Rec.: Literature, Motoring and Gardening; Bus. Add.: K.S.M. Bldgs., Prince Edward Street, Durban; Phone: 69229; Res. Add.: Tongaat Beach Township (Desainagar), Tongaat, Natal. WY BO SEEDAT, Kassim Mohamed: Medical Practitioner; M.R.C.S. (England); L.R.C.P. (London); b. 1897, New- castle, Natal. Educated: Newcastle Convent School, Bom- bay University and London. One of the longest practicing Indian Medical Man in this country. Established first practice in 1930. Holds various posts in Health Services, Social, Religious and Cultural bodies.

---

## Page 4

298 The Sayani Family \%S) HAJEE, Cassim Tar Mahomed SAYANI, also known as Cassim Tar, born in Porbandar about 1800, died in 1895. He was highly respected in the community and the Authorities in the Princely State of Porbandar, India. He served as Prime Minister (Dewan) of the State of Porbandar, and also acted as Regent in the absence of the Rana Sahib. 4862 MOOSA, Hajee Cassim: Merchant. b. 1843, Porbandar, India. Second son of Hajee Cassim Tar Mohamed SAYANIL. Arrived in South Africa in 1875. A pioneering Merchant in Natal and Transvaal, traded as Moosa Hajee Cassim. Later branched out to Orange Free State, the Cape and Portuguese East Africa. An entrepreneur of wide vision, he began importing on a huge scale, and initially his pur- chase of merchandise in London was so, large that he could not get the regular line of steamers to bring out his goods; bought his own boat the “S.S. Crescent” in 1895. He then began to operate a regular passenger boat service between Dur- ‘ban and Bombay, sailing under the banner of the “Moosa Line”. Very charitably disposed, he was one of the three members of the early Muslim community to donate properties towards the Juma Musjid Trust and the Por- bandar Madressa Trust. Public-spirited, he was one of the founder members of the Natal Indian Congress, and played a prominent role in the affairs of the community. Married to Hoorbai Saleh Mahomed Bagasrawaila. They had three sons and a daughter, Ayesha. He died in Durban, 16th May, 1921. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO yess HAJEE, Aboobaker Moosa: Direc- tor of Companies; b. 2nd Feb., 1903, Porbandar, India. Eldest son of Moosa Hajee Cassim. Arrived in South Africa in 1909. Edu.: Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban. From an early age he traded under the firm of M. H. Cassim & Son as Importers and Oil Millers. He joined the late Mr. A. I. Kajee in the year 1939 in pioneer- ing the establishment of cinemas throughout the Republic, provid- ing a very high standard of a much needed recreational amenity for the community, a standard which has been maintained over the years. Public Activities: Trustee and Chairman of Juma Musjid Trust; Founder and Trustee of Moosa Hajee Cassim Charities Trust (which established the “Booth Road Government Aided Indian School”, the ‘‘Fanin Government Aided Indian School” at Wyebank, and which led to the forma- tion of the “Mooi River Indian School Trust” for the purpose of establishing “The A. I. Kajee Government Aided Indian School” at Mooi River); Founder of the “Muslim Merchants Charitable Fund”; Hon. Secretary of Natal Indian Congress and Natal Indian Organisation; Executive Member of the South African Indian Congress; Member of Deputations to Government, Provincial and Municipal Authorities; Patron of Memon Welfare Society and many other welfare institutions; Vice Chairman of Royal Visit Indian Reception Committee; Air Raid War- den of Civilian Protective Services; Recipient of War Medal for Voluntary Services; Chairman of Finance Committce of the Friends of the Sick Association; Vice Chairman of Muslim Darul Yatama Wal Masakin; Hon. Secretary and Treasurer of Orient Club, Isipingo. Married: Halima O.A.H. Jhaveri. Died in Durban on 15th July, 1963. 1-BY ISMAIL, Moosa: Director of Companies. b. 7th May, 1910, Durban, Natal. Third son of Moosa Hajee Cassim. Educated: Carlisle Street Government Indian School and the Marine College. He traded under the name of Smile’s Shoe Store. Public Activities: Trustee of Moosa Hajee Cassim Charities Trust; Vice President of Muslim Cricket Club; Stars Foot- ball Club and Shamrocks Football Club. He took a very keen interest charitable and sporting activities. Married: Aysha H. I. Jhaveri who died in 1942. He sub- sequently married Fatima H. I. Lalpuria. Died on 19th February, 1952. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO Yes ABDULLA, Moosa: Director of Companies. b. 15th January, 1906, Porbandar, India. Second son of Moosa Hajee Cassim. Arrived in South Africa in 1909. Educated at the Higher Grade Government Indian School. Durban. Public Activities: Trustee of Juma Musjid Trust, Moosa Hajec Cassim Chari- ties Trust and Mooi River Indian School Trust. He represented the Cape at the South African Indian Congress at Durban, 1935; Exec. Member of Indo-European Joint Council in 1934; Acted as pro-tem Joint Secretary of the Natal Indian Congress in 1936/38; Executive Member of Natal Indian Congress 1924/27 and 1934/38; Member of Deputations at the First National Cabinet on Boroughs Ordinance in 1924, the Natal Provincial Council Select Committee on Borough Extended Ordinance 1934 and 1937, Natal Educational Inquiry Commission 1936, Par- liament Select Committee on Industrial Legislation 1937 arid several other deputations; served as Officer in the Bombay City Volunteer Corps during 1929; Member of Indian Surf Life Saving Club. He was a highly respected member of the City Council of Cape Town from the year 1951 up to the time of his demise. As Chairman of the Marketing. and Licénsing Committee he attended the Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Institute of Market Masters of South Africa at Salisbury, Rhodesia, in the year 1957. Married: Ayesha Amod Hajee Tayob. Died in Cape Town on 12th June, 1957. . (Ge HAJEE, Yusuf Aboobaker Moosa: Director of Companies. b. 14th May, 1929, Durban, Natal. Eldest son of Hajee Aboobaker Moosa. Educated at the St. Anthony’s Primary School] and Sastri College. Public Activities: Trustee of Por- bandar Madressa Trust; Juma Mus- jid Trust from 1964 to 1970; Moosa Hajee Cassim Charities Trust; Aboobaker and Halima Moosa_ Charities Trust; Orient Islamic Trust (the Abdobaker and Halima Moosa Charities Trust is one of the two donors who created the Reservoir Hills ~ Islamic Trust for the Primary purpose of erecting a Mos- que and Madressa at Reservoir Hills, Durban); Trustee and Secretary of Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Trust; Trustee of Mooi River Indian School Trust; Executive Member of the Indian Centenary Scholarship Trust; Married: ZohraN.M.O. Shaveri. Bus. Add.: Suite 101, First Floor, Victoria Heights, 56/58 Victoria Street, Durban, Natal. ie 299 MAHOMED, Farouk Moosa: Di- rector of Companies. b. 1st Feb., 1940, Durban, Natal. Second son of Hajee Aboobaker Moosa. Edu.: St. Anthony’s Primary School and Sastri College where he was Deputy Head Prefect. Obtained the B.A.L.L.B. at the University of Natal. Believed to be one of the youngest to qualify as an Advocate of the Supreme Court. Called to the Bar at the age of twenty two. Public Activities: Trustee of Moosa Hajee Cassim Charities Trust; Aboobaker and Halima Moosa Charities Trust and Mooi River Indian School Trust. Director of New India Assurance Company of South Africa Ltd. A very keen Cricketer. Was Assistant Secretary of Durban and District Cricket Union 1959/1961 and also its President. Married: Kulsum O. O. Allie. Bus. Add.: Suite 101, First Floor, Victoria Heights, 56/68 Victoria Street, Durban. ese MOOSA, Aboobaker Moosa: Di- rector of Companies. b. 24th April, 1943, Dundee, Natal. Third son of Hajee Aboobaker Moosa. Educa- ted at the St. Anthony’s Primary School; Anjuman Islam State Indian School and Sastri College. Obtained his B.A. with the Uni- versity of South Africa. Public Activities; Trustee of Moosa Hajee Cassim Charities Trust and Aboo- baker and Halima Moosa Charities Trust. Founder/Director of the New Republican Bank Ltd.; Mem. of the Renal Dyalisis Committee of the Shifa Hospital Trust. Joint Secretary, for two Consecutive terms of the Orient Club; Married: Mariam A. H. Omar; Bus. Add.: Suite 101, First Floor, Victoria Heights, 56/58 Victoria Street, Durban. {¢ 84 OMAR, Aboobaker Moosa: Stu- dent. b. 27th January, 1956, Dur- ban, Natal. The youngest son of Aboobaker’ Moosa. Educated at Orient Islamic Primary School and Orient Islamic High School.

---

## Page 5

300 440 SEWGOOLAM, Papwa Sewsun- ker: b. 1928. Famous Indian Golf- er with the “WRONG WAY GRIP”. Rose to top against ail odds. Garment factory worker, caddie and now Professional Golfer. Won Dutch Open 1959/ 1960/1961 and 1964. Won Natal and South African Open (Country Club), 1963, by two strokes to Retief Waltman. Was First in Richlieu Grand Prix (Royal Dbn.). Second to Bruce Keyter in the 2nd Leg and 13th in the 3rd Leg at Kensington, won by Gary Player. Was joint 6th South African Open, 1964. Took part in South African Open, 1965. Beat Gary Player by one stroke. Was 6th Carling Inv. World Tournament, 1965. Government Policy, however, prohibited this talented THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Golfer from taking part in White Tournaments from 1966. Campaigned in New Zealand. Took part in various Non- White Tourneys, 1971/73 in this country. I4A| SEODAYAL, Suresh: Secretary and Farmer. b. lst May, 1936, Glendale, Natal. Educated: Parukabad School, Stanger High and M. L. Sultan Technical College, Durban. Son of Seodayal of Glendale. Senior Clerk with M. L. Sultan Technical College (Stanger Branch) and farmer at Glendale. Is also Secretary: Lower Tugela Hindi Patshala. Rec.: Angling. Married: Molly Nowbath of Isipingo; On the staff of the Harry Bodasingh State-Aided Indian School. Bus. Add.: M. L. Sultan Technical College, P. O. Box 203, Stanger Phone: 512; Res. Add.: 153 Balcombe Street, Stanger — Phone: 677. BE IOEHE BE IK NOERL BH HOEHABA BH BE HH BA HE HE BUA HEB BO HOEHEB HE HE Be HE HEH 3 HHH BH HER BH HE HB NH BHO HEB BB BYE XE REA RR YA BR I | The Laljee Sewgolam Family : of Ladysmith HE SK IK I RL BAIN IRI HR RRB BONE HE BIE HH HOEHOEHL BO HOE HI HEH BI HEH BB HEH BH HK NOE I HERE BEE BE HOE BH HK BE HB HEE BE BK I ERIE EERE PI x x x x ae Puran Sewgolam. arrived in this country in 1886 and settled in the Mooi River area where he was attached to the N.G.R. as a Break-down man and loco-feeder. Some years later he was transferred to Ngagone in Northern Natal. In 1916 he retired from railway work and settled in Ladysmith. He was born in Azamghad in the U.P., in 1846. He died in 1959 at the age of 114. IZA LALJEE, Sewgolam: Miller; b. 31st March, 1902 at Mooi River. Educated: Kent Street, Ladysmith and Ladysmith Govt. School. Son of Sewgolam Puran. Origin: Azam- ghad, U.P., India. Hindi Teacher, Over a number of years. Keen worker — Hindu Education. Activities: Hon. Life Vice Presi- dent: Schools F.C.; Was Chairman: Hindu Cultural Society; Chairman, Trustee and Foundation Member: Ladysmith Arya Samaj; Founder and President: Hindi Yuvak Sabha (fourteen years); Grantee: K. R. Govt. Aided School (ten years); Founder: M. L. Sultan Technical College; M. C. Varman Schools; Member: S. A. and Natal Shiksha Sung; Member: Hindi Shiksha Sung, Ladysmith. Was Member: S.D.S. Rec.: Captained Schools, Football Club; Ladusmith Football Club and Shamrocks. Married: Sewraji Mahabal of P. M. Burg; S 5; D 3. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 326, Ladysmith — Phone: 995; Res. Add.: 69 Tanjore Road, Ladysmith — Phone: 995. BS SS -$-2-3.5-5-2-2- 2-2-4 \eay SEWGOLAM, Sarwanth Laljee: School Principal. b. 16th June, 1926 at Ladysmith, Natal. Edu.: Widsor High and Sastri College. Eldest son of Laljee Sewgolam of Ladysmith; UNISA — B.A., B.A. Hons., N.T.D. Joined Teaching profession in 1947 — Ladysmith Indian Secondary School as Assistant Teacher up to 1961. Promoted to Greytown High, 1961/66 as Vice Principal. On promotion to Chaka’s Kraal — Principal 1966/67. Promoted to Mountain Rise S. School as Ist Principal. A very active figure in various public organisa- tions. Was connected with I.C.W.S. — Chairman — Lady- smith. Founder and Committee Member of Society in Greytown 1964/66. Now Member: Local I.C.W.S.; Was Secretary: Ladysmith Hindu Yuvak Sabha. Also Member of S.A.LT.A. Was first special grade teacher (Assistant) (1957), Member: New Holmes (P. M. Burg) Indian Rate- payers Association; Member: F.O.S.A. (P. M. Burg); Sports: Was Member: Siegetown Tennis Club Ladysmith. Married: Savithri, daughter of C. Prem of Durban (Asher- ville); No children; Bus. Add.: Mountain Rise S. School, Pietermaritzburg; Res. Add.: 88 Bolhambra Way, New Holmes, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Amarnath Sewnandan Family i ) a SEWNANDAN, Kanchanwathie A.: Housewife, b. Durban. Edu.: St. Aidan’s and Satri College. School Teacher. Has taught at various schools. Now on the staff of P. P. Chetty State Aided School. Interested in Art and Classical Indian Music. Member: Stri Samaj - A.P.S. Travel: India, Far East, Ceylon and = African countries. SEWNANDAN, Amrath: Public Bookkeeper and General Agent. b. 8th Dec., 1922, Durban. Son of Sewnandan. Edu.: Springfield Methodist, Cato Manor and Natal Technical Institute. Began Bookkeeping activities in 1939. Established City Bookkeeping Bureau — 1949, Director: Zinnia Investments (Pty.) Ltd., D.-H.M.S. Properties (Pty.) Ltd., Sewnandan & Ramilall (Pty.) Ltd. Other Acts.: H.L.V.P., Past Chairman and Secretary: Mayville District F.A.; Past Vice Chairman and Treasurer: Southern Natal Football Association; Past Secretary: Southern Natal Indian Football Association; Councillor S.N.F.A.; Committee Member: South African Soccer Federation (Prof. League); Councillor: F.A.N.; Chairman: Mayville District Cricket Union; Treasurer: Natal Cricket Union; Treasurer: Natal Cricket Board of Control; Vice Chairman: Clare Estate Community Centre; Councillor: Clare Estate Ratepayers’ Association; Councillor: Syden- ham Social and Welfare Circle; Chairman: Dharma Niketan; Member: Durban Indian Benevolent Society; Hon. Audi- tor: P.O. Chetty State Aided School. Was a Member of the N.LC. and S.A.1.C. Travel: Far East, India, Ceylon, P.E.A. and C.A. Married: Kanchanwathie R. Soodyal; D 2; Bus. Add.: 17-21 Valbro Chambers, 114 Victoria Street, Durban — Phone: 62900; Res. Add.: 99 Spencer Road, Clare Estate, Durban — Phone: 888992. Vu The B. Sewpaul Family of Stanger Parag the pioneer of the Sewpaul family arrived sometimés towards the third quarter of the century. Later, after the initial contract period, he settled in New Germany near Pinetown, where Sewpaul was born in 1884. He farmed at first at Umhlali and then moved to Nonoti where the Parag “xmily still remains, carrying on the family calling of faruiing. They also bought a farm at Doesburg. Parag was one of the few pioneers who realized the value of education and before his death one of his last acts was to donate a site for the building of a school. That is where the present Nonoti Indian School still stands — a monument to the man. 144% BASDAV, Sewpaul: Farmer. b. October, 1912, Nonoti. Educated: Nonoti School. Farming at Lot 16, Stanger. Active Member of the community in the area in all Social, Educational and Religious Matters. Instrumental in land grant for the establishment of the first Indian School in Lot 14 to perpetuate late father’s memory. School named Sewpaul State Aided School. Mr. Sewpaul is a Central Committee Member — Natal Indian Cane Growers Asso- ciation and a Vice Chairman of the Gladhow N. E. Mill Group Board. He is a Grantee of the Sewpaul State Aided School. Deeply Religious, he is a Member of the M.E.R.M. Sursathey Tumeshar of Emona, Tongaat; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 215, Stanger — Phone:1811; Res. Add.: Lot 16, Stanger, Natal.

---

## Page 6

far SEWPAUL, Moothiram: Market Sales Representative. b. Ist April, 1920, Pictermaritzburg. bdu.: St. Anthony’s and Woodlands High. Son of Bodri Sewpaul. One of leading younger set of Sports Administrators in the Midlands. Has served on various sub-com- mittees of the M.D.I.C.U. and the M.LF.A. since 1938. Was Past Treasurer of both codes and of the Northern Natal F.A. and the Football Association of Natal in 1971. Heisa Vice President of the Maritzburg Indian Sports Associa- tion. Tending towards the Religious, recently, he is the Secretary and Treasurer of Shri Vishnu Temple; Com. Member of the Hindu Crematorium (Mountain Rise), Played a leading part in the building of the Shri Vishnu Schoo! and the Crematorium at Mountain Rise. Was elected H.L.V.P.: Shri Vishnu Temple; Veda Dharma Sabha; Royals C.C. and F. Clubs and is a Chairman of the Shri Vishnu Education Committee. Also served as Treasurer: S.D.S. 1947/68; Married: Shanti Devi G. Jag- wanth: D 5. Res. Add.: 560 Longmarket Street, P. M. Burg — Phone: 25768. \ $00 SHAH, Nadir: Businessman. b. 25th Nov., 1944, Richmond, Ntl. Edu.: Richmond Govt. Aided Ind. School and Woodlands High. Son of Issop Shah. Origin: Kabul, Afghamstan, India. Began at the age of twelve in Senior ranks as Goal-keeper — Richmond Pirates F/C.; Woodlands H/S; Rep. Natal ’ q High School (1960/61). Joined ’ professional ranks — Lincoln City, at the age of sixteen (A.A: Soccer League). Rep. Natal Professionals v/s Transvaal Professionals, 1963. Rep. P. M. Burg Professionals v/s Durban Professionals on numerous occasions. Spotted by Topper Brown for English Soccer. Coached by Topper Brown before leaving for England. Trained with Durban United — Les Salton and Le Roux. Guested for Arsenal, South Hampton and the South End United, England. Joined Aces United and Avalon Athletics XP's on return from England. Was in Australian professional Soccer — 1968/69. Other Activities: Committee Member and Trainer: Richmond Sports Club; Richmond Indian Rate- payers Association. Sports: Soccer, Cricket, Tennis, Ath- letics (Long Jump — Champion, Inter-School, 1959). Rec.: Angling; Married: Zubeida, daughter of Azam Ally of Riverside, Durban; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 45, Richmond, Natal — Phone: 60; Res. Add.: Chilly Street, Richmond, Phone: 133. \go) SHABOODIEN, Adam Esham: Businessman. b. 22nd Jan., 1910, Sanglod, District Ratnagiri, India. Educated: Sang- lod and Kipling Street, Cape Town. Son of Esham Shaboo- dien. Origin: Sanglod, India. First entered business scene, 1930. Joined Esham Shaboodien Bros. same year. Est. Shaboodien Bros., 1961. Well-known butchers. Activities: Trustee: Quwat-ul-Islam, Cape Town; Dapoli Anglo — THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Urdu H. S., India. Dapoli Anglo-Urdu H. S., Cape Town. Rec.: Motoring, Chariot Racing. Travel: India, Pakistan, Egypt and M.E., E.A., and P.E.A.; Married: Ayesha; S 5; D 4. Bus. Add.: 53 Waterkant Street, Cape Town — Phone: 26691; Res. Add.: 244 Buiteng-racht Street, Cape Town, Phone: 31422. \so% SHAIKH, Ismail Suleman: Direc- tor of Companies. b. 11th Oct., 1923, Durban. Educated: Carlisle Street, Sastri College and M. L. Sultan Technical College, A.C.I. (England). Eldest son of Suleman Ebrahim Shaikh of Kathor, Dist. Surat, India. General Manager — Factories Division — Kingsgate Group. Was previously connected various Wholesale Merchants. Joined Kingsgate Clothing Mnfrs., 1958. Established manufacturing section with twenty machines. Moved to present modern factory premises in Leopold Sireet in 1962, was in sole charge of total clothing manufacturing division covering several floors. Director: Mahomed Ismail & Co., Majestic Clothing Mnfrs., Pan-af Clothing Mnfrs., Metropolitan Shirt and Kingsgate Clothing Mnfrs. Holder — Diploma — Associate- ship of Clothing Institute (England); Executive Member: Clothing Institute (Natal Branch) since 1969; Member: Educational Committee — Clothing Institute (Natal); Executive Member: Natal Clothing Manufacturers’ Asso. since 1964. Rec.: Tennis; Member: Orient Club; Capt.: Orient Tennis 1971/72. Keen Amateur Photographer. Widely travelled — U.K., Europe, U.S., Canada, M.E., India. Married: Khatija A. C. Haffejee. Bus. Add.: 27 Leopold Street, Durban — P. O. Box 872; Phone: 65141/ 317147; Res. Add.: 74 College Road, Asherville, Durban; Phone: 888677. jge> SHAIKMODEEN: Farmer and Bus Owner. b. 23rd February, 1909, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Wesleyan Govt. Aided School, Fairbreeze, Natal. Son of Raj Mohamed of Maidstone. Cane Farmer. Runs own Bus Service — Isinenbe Bus Service, since 1948. Runs other businesses under various names. Activities: Present Vice President: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association and Past Organiser Secretary of Ass. — . ~*~ 1934/35;Member: Tongaat Indian Mill Group; Secretary: Tongaat Muslim Society since inception (1936); Past Member: LC.W.S., Stanger and Tongaat. Donated land for school at Cranbrook, near Stanger, now known as H. Ramrethan State-Aided School, Cranbrook; Also donated land for Fairbreeze Govt. State School. One of best known figures on the North Coast. Supporter of every deserving cause. Interested in Education and Community Upliftment. Rec.: Soccer, Tennis, Fishing. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 19, Maid- stone — Phone: 103; Res. Add.: Main Road, Maidstone, Phone: 103. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO \go¥ SHAIKH, Yusuf Shaikh Suleman “Solly”: Family Butcher. b. 27th September, 1935, P. M. Burg, Ntl. Educated: P. M. Burg. Joined family business at an early age. Assumed sole control in 1959. Trades as Yusuf’s Butchery — one of better known family butchers in the Capital (Est. 1940). Takes a keen interest in all local activi- ties. Member: Nizamia Muslim Society; Indian Master Butchers’ Association, Mountain Rise Indian Ratepayers’ Association. Director: Yusuf’s Property Holdings; Rec.: Classical Indian Music, Cricket and Soccer; Bus. Add.: 97 Retief Street, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 22170; Res. Add.: 45 Manning Avenue, Mt. Rise, P. M. Burg, Natal. \SoS SHAMSOODEEN, Mohamed: Travel Agent and Insurance Broker. b. llth September, 1928, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria G. and Kilneston High School. Second son of Abdul Karrim Cassim of Pretoria. Director of Companies. Shamsoo’s Travel Agency. One of leading Indian Travel Agencies in the Transvaal. Also runs Insurance Agency. Interested in all local activities; Rec.: Tennis and Soccer. Married: Rabia, daughter of Moosa Hajee Cassim of Pretoria; S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: 5 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. Phone: 36554 and 20324; Res. Add.: 369 Struben St., Pretoria —~ Phone: 20751. a] 4 joe SHEIK, Goolam Kader Abdul: Businessman. b. 6th March, 1916, Dannhauser, Natal. Educated: Dannhauser Private School. Se- cond son of Sheik Abdool. One of early pioneers of Dannhauser (1893) and Mysore, India. Origi- nally in family business Sheik Abdool & Sons Established 1923. Runs own business under the same name since 1958. Acts.: Past Chairman and Trustee: Dann- hauser Islamic Society; Grantee: Dannhauser Govt. Aided School: Committee Member: Dannhauser Indian School — Educational Committee; Mem.: F.O.S.A.; Patron: Dannhauser United Cricket Club and Football Association; Rec.: Cricket, Tennis and Angling; Married: $1; D 1; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 4, Dannhauser ~ Phone: 14; Res. Add.: Camp Street — Phone: 14, Dannhauser, Natal. Igo SHEOCHAND, Ramcharan: Transport Operator and Di- rector of Companies. b. 11th March, 1931, Inanda, Natal. Educated: Natal and Sastri College. Youngest son of Sheochand, Arrajilah, Upper Bihar, India. Is a Director and Foundation Member of the Phoenix/Inanda Transport Services — Cartage Contractors. Secretary (from inception, 1964) Phoenix/Inanda Transport Co., Secretary: Inanda Bus Owners Association; Other Activities: Secretary: Inanda Indian Welfare Society (Hamper Committee — Diwali); Chairman: Local Committee — Inanda Indian Welfare Society (Duffs Road); Committee Member: Fund Raising Committee — I. I. W. Society; Grants Co- 303 mittee; Member: F.O.S.A.; Member: Inanda Area — Care Committee (F.O.S.A.); Member: South African Hindu Maha Sabha and Shri Sanathan Dharam Sabha Natal. On delegation — to comission of Inquiry into General Transport. Active Member of various institutions such as Blind Society; Hindu Shikshasung Natal. Rec.: Table Tennis, Tennis, Amateur Dramatics and Soccer. Toured India — 1959 and 1963. Married: Kelapathy, daughter of Badlu Singh of Malvern; S 2; D 2. Res. Add.: 36 Starling Road, Duffs Road, Natal. jood SIDDIQUE, Mohamed Aqueel: Surgeon, Specialist. b. 7th Jan., 1935, Baraut, District Meerut, India. Educated: Baraut High Schoo], Agra and Lucknow Uni- versities — Royal College of Surgeons — England. Origin: Meerut, India. Since partition, new home in Karachi. First non- _ . White appointed as Surgeon Spe- f & cCialist at Queen Elizabeth II r 7 Hospital in Maseru, Lesotho, in charge of over hundred beds. Well respected and liked by the King, ; Government and subjects in Lesotho for his friendly and amiable personality. Acts.: Organiser: Sufia Primary School Project in Butha-Buthe, Lesotho, and also an Executive of Butha Buthe Mosque. Married: Nayyar Mohamed Aziz Khan: S 1: D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 122, Maseru, Lesotho; Res. Add.: Maseru, Lesotho — Phone: 2261. SHIBA, Uttam Vassan: Businessman. b. 26th September, 1937, Lansdowne, C.P.; Educated: All Saints, Livingstone High School. Son of Vassan Narshi. Origin: Kothar, India. Joined family business Shiba’s — 1955. Is a Director of the firm. Specialists in Shoe and Leather Goods. Manu- facturers of Leather Bags and Footwear. Activities: Member: United Hindu Association; Cape Town Kshatinya Mitra Mandal; Sports: Table Tennis; Married: Manjula, daughter of Govind Morar of Durban; § 1;D 1. Bus. Add.: 391 Lansdowne Road, Lansdowne, Cape Province — Phone: 770459; Res. Add.: 47 Ernest Street, Rylands Estate, Athlone. ISO SHRIKISSOON, Devnarayan: Businessman. b. 1st March, 19, Durban, Natal. Edu.: Clairwood School and Sastri College. Son of Devnarayan. Origin: Patna (Bihar), India. Is a Director of Companies. Leading Dry-Cleaning business in Clairwood area ~ Coastal Dry Cleaners. Also in the Re-treading & Plastic Moulded Goods Manu- ; facturing field. On Directorate — New India Assurance Co. of S.A. Widely travelled — India, Pakistan, M.E.. U.K. and Europe. Rec.: Boating. Married: Dasmathy Sew- gulam; S 1; D 4. Bus. Add.: Coastal Dry Cleaners, Clair- wood Phone: 818732.

---

## Page 7

joll SINGH, Badahur (Badlu): Retired r Farmer. b. 1888, Balia, U-P., India. One of early pioneers in the La Mercy area. Was attached to / the old mill at Grey Place, near <i) rm. Glenashley. Later farmed and was i a trader in live-stock. Also was for some time at New Germany. Now resides at 27 Bailey Road, Red Hill, Durban, Natal. 1612 SINGH, Chand: Indian Psycholo- gist and Career Consultant. b. 1929, Durban, Natal. Studied Palmistry. Qualifed Cheiro Psy- chologist. South Africa’s most famous Hand-reader. He evinced a great interest in the occult at an early age, and took up the serious side of the science and qualified as a Cheiro Psychologist .... that is, dileanating disease and character from the hand. He now specialises in advising students as to what career they should pursue in life, so as to avoid being “squ- are pegs in a round hole”. His services are now being sought by Industry and Commerce for the selection of personnel as is now in vogue in Europe and the States. Has also conducted experiments and tests with leading medical authorities, local and overseas, in the field of preventative medicine. Also interested in the Psychic and the Occult. Was at one time the President of the Psychic Research Society. Practices Hypnotherapy and uses it only for curative purposes. Conducts a Mail Order Business, supply- ing occult books, courses, and Zodiac ornaments. Can be contacted at permanent address: P. O. Box 2378, Durban. S S13 SINGH, Gopaul: Cane Farmer; b, 7th September, 1915, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Hanuman Singh of Tongaat and Agra, India. Farming in the Main Flats area of Maidstone, Natal, North Coast. Activities: Member: Shree Vishnu Temple, Tongaat; ed — Natal Indian Cane Growers Asso.; : X von Tongaat Indian Mill Group; Com. Member: Sandfields State-Aided Indian School, Maidstone. Contri- buted largely to various Religious and Educational bodies. Rec.: Literature, Fishing, Camping and Hunting; Married: Kylas, Rampersadh Singh of Mayville, Durban; D 4; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 28 Phone: 1531, Tongaat; Res. Add.: Main Flats, Maidstone — Phone: 1531. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO bab SINGH, George ace Babu: Businessman and Insurance Agent. b. 13th September, 1933, Umzinto, Natal. Edu.: St. Anne’s Mission School and Umzinto High. Son of Babu Singh of Umzinto and U.P., India. Began as Teacher, 1953. Taught at various schools. Resigned 1965 and joined Insurance field. Top Insurance man. Runs Funeral Parlour in Umzinto — Umzinto Funeral Services. Other Activities: Was Secretary: Umzinto I C. W. Society; Played Soccer and ran Body-building school in Umzinto. Was Manager: South African Boxing Champion, Louis Joshua and John Mtimkulu; Rec.: Boxing, Judo, Body-building. Married: Gayithree, daughter of J. D. Singh of Ladysmith; S 1;D1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Bo: 5° ~ Phone: 154, Umzinto; Res. Add.: 12 Carmon Avenus, «: sport — Phone: 881512. is lS SINGH, Harry: Businessman. b. Heidelburg, Transvaal. Educated: Johannesburg Indian High School. Son of Kungbeharie Singh. Estab. own business, 1966 — Singh’s Trading Store, Retail Merchants. toe \! Interests — Religious Studies, . ae Social and Cultura! activities. Was a ¢ voluntary Hindu Teacher under 84 auspices of Sivananda Saraswathie , <a Vidyalaya. A member of the , Divine Life Society. Gave free tuition, vernacular education, - Hindustani children in Pretoria. Rec.: Soccer; Travel: P.E.A., Swaziland. Married: Lela, daughter of Soomer “Tom” Maharaj of Ladysmith; D 4. Bus. Add.: 182 — 4th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: 34205; Res. Add.: 186 — 11th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. IG 1b SINGH, Hoodiram Isaree: General Cartage Contractor. b. Sth June, 1906, Newcastle, Natal. Educated: St. Oswalds School. Son of Isaree Singh. Origin: Gwalior, India. Businessman. Established General Cartage Contracting business, 1935, H. I. Singh, Cartage Contractors. One of leading members of the Hindi Community. Keen student of Hindi scriptures and Comp. Religion. Activities: Pres.: Newcastle Hindi Temple; Trustee: Newcastle Hindi Tem- ple; Patron: Shree Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal) Dbn. Was Secretary: Natal Indian Congress (Newcastle Branch). Was Foundation Hon. Secretary: Lennoxton Hindu Cemetery and Crematorium upto 1955; Vice President: Newcastle Indian Ratepayers Association; President: Ramahin Sabha Mundal; Member: Hindi Pracharnee Sabha — Newcastle; Rec.: General; Married: Jumnee, (Died: 24th October, 1963), daughter of Umrow Singh. S 3;D 1. (thirteen grandchildren); Bus. Add.: 25 Kirkland Street, Newcastle — Phone: 95; Res. Add.: 62 Lincoln St., Newcastle, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Si7 The Boni Jaldharie Sing Family of Umzinto- It is not known exactly when the first of this branch of the Singh Family arrived in South Africa. Jaldharie was the 2nd son of Palatsingh and he was born in 1884 in Natal. After working for the Natal Government Railways as a shunter he settled in the Umlaas area. Some years later he moved to Esperanza and not long after, to Umzinto, where the family resides to this day. Jaldharie Singh ran a horse-drawn transport business from 1918 and it was about 1924 that a motorised bus service was put into operation with a twelve passenger Dodge vehicle. The family business met with mixed fortunes over these initial years and Jaldharies death in 1929 meant a fresh start for the family. The depression in the early thirty’s was a crippling period so that by 1934 the family was left to its own devices. Bonie was the second of Jaldharie’s sons From 1936, when he left school, to 1944, when he first broke into the Transport business, it was one long, hard grind. He graduated from grease-boy to the managership of his uncle’s garage in Umzinto and it was during this time that he broke into the taxi business and by 1947 he owned several taxis. This signalled a further expansion into the Transport field — the year 1950 saw the first bus and Boni Singh’s establishment into Passenger Transport on a larger scale. The Kismet Trading Company gave the financial impetus to this move and by 1956, there were seven buses on various runs. The Umtwalumi, Hibberdene and Dududu Services, belonging to different owners, were incorporated into Boni’s Bus Service. With further advances in this direction over the last seventeen years, the fleet is now fourteen in number A remarkable advance in this short period. The activities did not end here. Boni Singh took over a garage in 1953 and ran it jointly with a cousin, S. Ramsingh, until 1958. Pressure of work in the Trans- port section hurried a dissolution of the partnership and Boni now concentrates solely on Bus Transport. Boni Singh was educated at St. Annes in Umzinto. If is a school he has much to thank for. In his difficult childhood, beset with poverty, the school provided all books for his study. He was born in January 18th, 1919. He is a Director of Jai Hind Investment Corporation, Marburg Investments, and Boni’s Bus Service. His recreation, Angling, gives him much pleasure in the little spare time he has at his disposal. During 1966 he visited the continent and the United Kingdom. Married: Suminthra, daughter of Ramknar Singh. There are five sons and six daughters of the marriage. Bus. Add.: Boni’s Bus Service, P. O. Box 44 — Phone: 107, Umzinto; Res. Add.: Off Park Rynie Road, Umzinto — Phone: 107, Umzinto, Natal. 305

---

## Page 8

THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ‘518 The Singhs of Isinembe Fowdari Singh, head of this branch of the Singhs, arrived here in 1889 on board the S. S. Congella at the age of six. A boundary dispute in India resulted in the death of the father and both mother and child were soon on their way here and settled in Durban. Fowdari Rambharas Singh, to give him his full name, moved to Isinenbe at the age of seventeen and began farming on fifty acres of land which. grew to a 1000 acres by the time of his death in 1948. While the family ran the farm he worked for many years for a Mr. Marchand, as farm manager. He was one of the first to introduce rice growing here and reaped his own crop each year. He took a keen interest in communal activities and was instrumental in setting up the first Ramayan Sabha at Isinembe. He contributed generously towards both the Isinembe School and Hariroop Vishnu Temple (Spionkop) and was an estcemed and well respected member of the Indian community. He was born at Chinpore, Patna, India in 1883. }S23B RAMLAKAN: b. Isinembe, Natal (Maidstone). Educated: Isinembe Govt. Aided School. Farmer and Businessman. Interested in all Social and Religious matters. Keen worker in the field of Education. Also runs Taxi Service. Married; D 1. S24 GUNPATH: b. 1904, Isinembe, Maidstone, Natal. Edu.: Isinembe Govt. Aided School. Farmer. Has always taken a’ keen interest in Religious matters. Treasurer: Shri Hariroop Vishnu Temple of Isinembe for over thirty five years. Married: Doorga Singh of Richmond; S 10; D 1. \G 2S SEWSUNKER: b. 1910, Isinembe, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Isinembe Govt. Aided School. Farmer and Businessman. Keen Farmer and shows learning towards the culinary art and a staunch worker in all religious matters. Fine organiser. Toured India in 1961. Married: Rajhkumarie Doorga Singh of Richmond; S 3; D 6. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE SINGH FAMILY Continued ... 1S 2e SEWNARAIN: b. 24th March, 1912, Isinembe, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Isinembe Govt. Aided School. Farmer. Takes a keen interest in the well being of his community in the Isinembe area. Married: Paravathie Bharath Singh of Verulam (Oakford Priory); S 3; D 2; Bus. Add.: Maidstone, Natal. S27) SEWDUTH: (Johnny): b. 1908. Died: March, 1947. Edu.: Isinembe School. Farmer. He was very interested in farming and new methods and responsible for purchasing five hundred acres now run jointly by H. Sugar Estates. Married: Damayant B. Singh; S 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 58, Maidstone, Natal — Phone: 1320. IS28 HARISHUNKER K. Singh: b. 25th November, 1922, Isinembe, Natal, North Coast. Educated: [sinembe Indian School and Sastri College. Farmer; Well known figure of Nonoti area. Activities: Member: Nonoti Indian School Board; Darnell Indian Mili Group; Rec.: Angling, Litera- ture. Married: Kushmavathie Devi, daughter of Harri Roopsingh; $ 1; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 180, Stanger. Phone: 1211 (Darnell); Res. Add.: Holmbush, Darnell. 307 IS 29 SINGH, MHurriram Ranchuran: Businessman. b. 27th March, 1905, Ladysmith, Natal. Edu.: Ladysmith Govt. Indian School. Eldest son of Ramchuran Singh. Sports Administrator since 1926. Connected with K.R.D.I-F.A.; N.D.LF.A.; N.D.LF.A.; N.LF.A. and S.A.LF.A. Began as waiter d established first retail busi- ness, 1950. Was leading passenget and goods transport operator in K. R. District. Activities: Was President: N. Natal C. Union and ae also served in various other capacities and Cricket Unions at Dist., Prov., and National levels; Post Record Cl, Vice President, President and L. Vice President: K. R. D. L F. A.; Vice President and President: N.D.I.F.A.; Was President: Natal Refrees Association; Del. to, Vice President, Selector, Executive and President: N.LF.A. (1927/55); Vice President: S.A. Indian Football Association. Also held numerous posts in 2 above C.U.’s and was President: N.I,C,U. (two years). Treasurer, Secretary, Vice President and Trustee: S. D. S.; Vice President: S. D. S. (Natal); Treasurer and President: Hindu Cultural Society; Past Member and Trustee: M. L. S. I School; Life Member: Educational Committee — M. L. S. School. Has held numerous posts in every sphere of Indian activity. Rec.: Soccer, Music and Cricket; Married; S 9; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 270, Ladusmith, Phone: 1358; Res. Add.: 9 Delhi Road, Indian Township, Ladysmith ~ Phone: 565. ISzo SINGH, Inder Behari: Reat Estate Agent. b. 20th April, 1916, Um- zinto, Natal. Educated: Umzinto Indian School and Sastri College. Son of Behari Singh of Umzinto and Gwalior, Upper Bihar, India. Established estate business during the depression period in the 30°s. Also Director of I. B. Earthworks, Road making and construction Engineers. Takes a keen interest in all matters affecting the comm- unity. Is a member of the West- ville Indian Ratepayers Associa- tion. Fond of Travel and Litera- ture. Active Tennis Player. Married: Christy Bodasingh of Ladysmith and at her demease; Married: Thara Narrandas of Ladysmith; S 2; D 8. Bus. Add.: 382 Pine Street — Phone: 28741, Westville; Res. Add.: 81 Devon Terrace, Westville, Durban — Phone: 857647.

---

## Page 9

THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO SB) The Ishwar Singh Family of Port Shepstone The Bambata Rebellion in 1906 also heralded the arrival of the first of this branch of the Singh family here. Born in the year 1875, Ishwar Singh was thirty one when he settled in the Deepdale area, near Bulwer, and saw outhis first five years of indenture with the Lewis family. The next ten years saw him at various places in Natal — Dargle Road (now known as Lion’s River) and Gillits where Ishwar Singh married and farmed for twenty eight years on land leased from the elder Gillits, after whom the little village took its name. By 1948 Ishwar had enough of this picturesque place, sixteen miles from Durban, and settled at Port Shepstone where he ran a stall in the Borough Market. Here he prospered somewhat and it is a tribute to his initiative and hard work that the family today owns four stalls in the local market. Two years later he went back to his homeland after an absence of forty four years. After a years stay, he was back in this country. The visit to India had revived old memories and renewed contacts with friends and family. After the tour Ishwar turned more towards religion. The visit to some India’s sacred temples and his meeting with some of leading religious figures influenced him to a great deal. Today, ‘at ninety seven, Ishwar Singh is not only an authority on Hindu scriptures — he speaks on other matters just as strongly. His is a philosophy of common reasoning in a téo ortho- dox and superstitious world plagued by ignorance of Hinduism’s true teachings. S32 . ATHMANDEO, Ishwar Singh: b. 29th May, 1918 a Dargie, Natal. Educated: Port Shepstone. Eldest son of Ishwar Singh. Farmed previously at Gillits. Moved to Port Shepstone and joined father in business at Borough Market in 1947, trading in fruit and vegetables. Interested in religious activities — Vedic. Is Chairman of Arya Samaj of Port Shepstone. Member: Indian Ratepayers Associa- tion; Parent/Teachers Association. Married: Rathanmanie, daughter of R. Misrilall of Pietermaritzburg; S 5; D 3. Bus. Add.: Port Shepstone Borough Market, Phone: 235/ 732; Res. Add.: Ganet Grove, Phone: 732/235, Port Shepstone, Natal. \S33 HARIDEO, Singh: b. Ist September, 1925 at Gillits. Educated: Pinetown Indian School. Runs own garage — Singh’s Service Station — established 1966. Member: Port Shepstone Arya Samaj; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 62, Phone: 2412, Port Shepstone; Res. Add.: Albersville, Port Shep- stone, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN-WHO'S WHO The J. B. Singh Family of Pietermaritzburg 1\Sdet PRAHLAD, J. B. Singh: b. 15th June, 1935, at Pentrich. Edu.: E.P.S., P. M. Burg. Third son of J. B. Singh. Joined rep. field in 1953 and in 1960 took over the family agency business. Now reps. Pakco (Pty.) Ltd., Eriksen Bros. (Pty.) Ltd., Durban Sugar Agency, Hayne & Co., L. M. Harris, A. M. Khan & Co.; Gollach & Gomparts (1967), Bhoba Trading Co. (Pty.) Ltd., Dannhauser Mills, Enamel Products, Pietersburg Milling Co., Standerton Boeremeule, Pieters- burg Produce Co., H. C. Foss & Co. Also a Director in various associate Companies of J.B. Singh Agency South Africa:— Messrs. Ganie Moosa & Co., Standard Distributors, Singh & Co. Ltd., Singh’s Agencies, oie Wholesalers. Bus. Add.: 510 Greytown Road, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 21781; Res. Add.: 58 Banga- lore Road, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 21781. J. B. SINGH, one of the leading Indian agents in Natal, was born in 1902 at Bellair. At an early age he joined the firm of Amod Bayats in P. M. Burg. Mr. M. L Kajee was then the Manager of the firm and it was he who was instru- mental in putting ‘J. B.” into the rep. field in 1930. In 1947 he opened his own retail store at Plessislaer and combining this with his agency work he made remarkable progress, representing some of the leading South African Manufacturers over a period of thirty years. He took a keen interest in all matters affecting the Indian community and was a well liked figure throughout the country. He died in 1960 at the age of fifty eight. He is survived by his widow, three sons and six daughters. The agency is now handled by the youngest sin, “J. P.”, who has greatly expanded the activities of “J. B” Singh Agencies (S.A.) over the last few years. IS3G DAYANAND, J.B. Singh: b. 26th December, 1930. Edu.: E.P.S. - Pietermaritzburg and Woodlands. Second son of J. B. Singh. Joined family business in 1945. Runs own concern — _ Sutherlands Wholesalers, Agents, Mobil Oil Company for Natal (“Laurel” paraffin). Subsidiary: Singh’s Produce Co. Res. Add.: 256 Bom- bay Road, Northdale, P. M. Burg, Phone: 23004. | Sn SINGH, Jaisingh Surajbulle: Teacher and Social Worker. b. 15th September, 1930, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Umdh- loti Govt. Aided School and Sastri College (3rd year B.A. University College). Son of S. M. Singh of Verulam. Origin: U.P., India. Has been in the teaching profession since 1952. A very keen Social and Civic Worker. Other Activities: Founder and Member: F.O.S.A. (Verulam Cane Committee); Foundation Member: Verulam Clinic Board; Past Secretary and Record Clerk: Verulam and District Indian Schoo! Sports Council; Assistant Secretary: Verulam Republican Festival Committee; Past Chairman and Present Vice Council: Verulam Branch — South Afri- can Indi... T ach. rs Association; Foundation Member and Chairmar. “erulam Library Trust; Joint Secretary: Veru- lam Civic Association. Also instrumental in introduction of Llood Transfusion Services to Verulam. Was Secretary and Past Vice Council: Verulam Clinic Board; Rec.: Horti- culture, Photography; Married: Savithree Sid Maharaj of O rban; S 3. Add.: 2 Ireland Street, Verulam — Phone: ~5, Verulam, Natal. \S 3¢e SINGH, Lalloo Rattan: Farmer; b. ist October, 1906, Clare Estate, Durban, Natal. Educated: Depot Road Indian School. Eldest son of Rattan Singh of Clare Estate and Ahmedabad, U.P., India. One of early Cliffdale settlers — 1935. Active Member of Indian Comm- unity. Holds various posts in Cliffdale area. Was lst Secretary : (Vidya Pracharni Sabha (Now Cliff dale Indian Welfare Society); Was Vice Chairman and now Trustee: Cliffdale Indian Association. Was also Chairman: Cliffdale School Meals Committee; Was Vice President: Cliffdale Indian Agricultural Association; Surety: Cliffdale Indian School (1942/52). Delegate to Health Committee (P. M. Burg) — Local Roads; Interested in Religious studies. Married: Bechitia, daughter of Odith Singh, formerly of Richmond; S 2; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Cliffdale, Natal; Res. Add.: Sterkspruit, Cliffdale;

---

## Page 10

SINGH, Mudhan: Businessman. b. 9th August, 1931, New Guelderiand, Natal. Educated: New Guelderland and Stanger High School. Son of Gian Singh of New Guelder- land and grandson of Ramdayal Singh, pioneer business- man of New Guelderland (1909), Butcher and Produce Merchant. Opened business in 1953. Manager, family concern, 1950/53. Keen Sportsmen and Office Bearer. Other Activities: Past Treasurer: New Guelderland Cricket Club; Lower Tugela Football Association; Vice President: N.G.C.C.; President: New Guelderland Football Club; Past President: Upper New Guelderland Football Asso.; Vice President: L.T.F.A.; Chairman: New Guelderland Local Child Welfare Society; Del.: Stanger and District Child Welfare Society; Member: F.O.S.A.; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Darts. Married: Ormilla Maharaj; S 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. New Guelderland Tel. 1530, Stanger, Natal. \IS¥O SINGH, Nursingh Khardari: S.A. Indian Council. Businessman. b. 3rd August, 1908, Newcastle, Natal. Educated: St. Oswalds ; Schoo] and tcadysmith Govt. } School. Eldest son of Khardari Singh. Entered business scene 1935. Garage, Retailer and Wholesaler, Blacksmith and Greengrocer. Estab. Garage — Newcastle Garage & Service Station — 1936. Was appointed first Indian Postal Agent at Lennoxton and Fairleigh (1938). Rep. town on practically every Educational deputation. Extensivelly travelled — U.S., Canada, U.K., Europe, African Territories. Appointed Cl. January, 1943. Was one of the founders of LC.W.S., Newcastle Branch and Chairman for a number of years. Activities: L.V.P.; Patron: Various Sports bodies over the years; Secretary and Vice President: Newcastle Hindu Temple; Trustee: Hindu Crematorium Society; Trustee: Hindu Crematorium Society; Trustee: Lennoxton Tennis Club; Former Trustee: Hindu Pracharnee Sabha; Trustee : Newcastle Indian Bursary Society; Chairman: Newcastle Social Club; F/Member: Hindu Seva Samaj; Vice President: N. District Indian Football Association; Committee Mem.: Newcastle Indian Ratepayers Association. Was appointed to S. A. Indian Council at inception for four years; Mem.: St. Oswalds School Educational and Advisory Coms. Rec.: Travel, Volunteered Social Worker. Married: Govind- thee, daughter of Amaichand Singh of Richmond. Bus. Add.: P. O. Newcastle; Res. Add.: 62 Kirkland Street, Newcastle — Phone: 517. Sq SINGH, Peter Mangal: Barman. b. 11th February, 1912, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Tongaat, Mooi River and Est- court Schools. Son of Bhairo Singh. Origin: Jodhpur, India. Joined catering industry, 1930. Barman at the Country Club since 1964. Was nominated L.A.C. (1969). Resigned due to pres. of work same year, served as Vice Chairman. One of founders and prime movers of Mooi River Indian School (1940). Activities: Was connected with various sports organisations, Natal Midlands, from 1922. F/Member; P/President, Secretary, Treasurer and Del.: Springboks Football Club — Mooi River; Vice President: Weenen County Football Association; Trustee/ Secretary: A. lL. Kajee Govt. Aided School, Adv. Com.; Member: Mooi River Ratepayers Association; Past Pres.: Ramakrishna Centre — Mooi River; Past Council; Member: THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO N.LF.A.; Was connected with the N.LO. and Del. to Cape Town Cénference; Rec.: Soccer; Married; S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 65, Mooi River — Phone: X08; Res. Add.: Mooi River Country Club, Mooi River, Natal. IS4a nessman. b. 29th March, 1932, Newcastle, Natal. Educated: St. Oswalds Indian School. Son of Rohan Singh. Established own business, 1960 — Bruntville Bus Service. Also Singhs Fresh Produce same year. Nominated L.A.C. (1969) and Singhs Transport (1966). Activities: Past Chairman and Secretary: Mooi River Sports Club; Secretary: Mooi River Indian Ratepayers Association; Member: A. I. Kajee Govt. Aided Indian School Educational Com.; Local Affairs Committee Mooi River; Ramakrishna Centre — Mooi River. Rec.: Soccer, Cricket, Tennis and Angling. Married: Phoolmathi, daughter of B. Bridge- mohan of Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg; S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 14, Mooi River ~ Phone: 123; Res. Add.: Peninsula, Mooi-River, Natal. \ 2 SINGH, Ranjith: School Principal. Teacher — B.A. (1958), N.T.D. b. lst March, 1923, Newcastle, Ntl. Educated: St. Oswalds and Sastri College. Son of S. R. Singh. First joined teaching profession, 1941 - Ballengeich Govt. School. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. Was one of founders of Lennoxton Govt. Aided School (Hindi Prancharini Sabha, Newcastle; Vice Chairman: Natal Indian Teachers’ Society (1967) — Newcastle Branch. Sports: Tennis (Lennoxton Tennis Club), Angling, Soccer. Promoted Principal: Lennoxton State Aided Indian School, 1971. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 9, Newcastle — Phone: 414; Res. Add.: 4 Trollip Street, Lennoxton, Newcastle — Phone: 206. IS¢¢q SINGH, Ramsagar: Businessman and Farmer. b. 1907. Educated: Verulam (Mission School), Wesleyan. Condi- tions at home did not permit a long stay at school and he left schooling at his mother’s death when the farm required all the attention of the two brothers. In his sixty’s now, Ramsagar Singh is active in many Social, Religious and Educational Institutions of Verulam. He still farms and is also connected with a retail business in the Redcliffe area. Other Activities: Was Committee Member: I. C. W. S., Verulam; Shree Gopalall Temple; Life/Patron: Deepavali Union (He was founder of this society) earlier known as Deepavali Sporting Union — established in 1927. He is also a Grantee of Mahadow Singh Memo. State Aided School and Trustee of the Verulam and District Indian School Board and the Deepavali Bursary Trust. Also Member: Canelands Indian Mill Group; Married: Sunnichari Sew- persadh Singh of Sydenham, Durban, Natal; S 6; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 152, Verulam; Res. Add.: Redcliffe, Verulam, Natal. SINGH, Nundkissor Rohan: Busi- : FRIK HK EK RE HE ME IR EEE, THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 311 ME SHC HO REREAD PEED EE DRE ACCESSES RS The Parthab Singh Family of Benoni PEEP CCEECCEECE EEC LCCCECCEEECCEEECEES ST PEE TT et Lt tet Letts fe Et ot tee te i x x x % % x x m loys The first of the Singhs of Gujranwalla, Punjab, arrived in this country in 1890 and settled in Boksburg. He was Isher Singh who was one of the few Punjabis to come to this country. He was in Mombasa for a short while and in South Africa he followed various pursuits and was a trader in Boksburg for some time. The family moved to Benoni shortly after the Boer war. He took a keen interest in all local activities and was well versed in the Urdu and Arabic having studied in India. He was born in Punjab about 1875 and died in Benoni in 1929. 1546 SINGH, Parthab: Businessman; b. 28th December, 1920 at Benoni, Transvaal. Educated: Khailas High School and College, India. Son of Isher Singh of Gujranwalla, Pun- jab, India. Entered business scenes, 1936 — P. Singh. Estab. business — Singh Bros. — 1949. Wholesale Fruit & Fresh Produce and General Dealers. Visited India and Pakistan, U.K. and Europe. Met leading personalities on tour. Activities: Former President and Trustee: Hindu Maha Sabha. Connected with the Sabha since its inception — Laid the Foundation Stone, 1953. Was captain of Khailas High School, India at Hockey. Rec.: Hockey and Soccer (Thistle Football Club); Literature and Travel. Married : Indira, daughter of B. A. Maharaj (Late) of Durban; S 2; D 5. Bus. Add.: 519 Mayet Drive, Actonville, Benoni — Phone: 543809; Res. Add.: 519 Mayet Drive, Actonville, Benoni — Phone: 543809. S47 INDIRA, Singh: Housewife; b. Botanic Villa, Durban, Natal. Edu.: Dartnell Crescent, Durban. Fourth daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. B. A. Maharaj of Durban. Married: Parthab Singh of Benoni. Was Secretary: Indian Women’s Club; Indian Women’s Association ’ and Indian Women’s Reading Cir- Pw Sy 4 cle. Met many leading personali- em . ties during tour of India and te ‘| 4 Pakistan (1953), Lady and _ Sir Rama Rao, Dr. Rajudas Prasad, Begum Liagat Ali Khan and lead- ing personalities on stage and screen. Also met the Prime Minister of India and attended Royal visit at Parliament House. Interests: Embriodery and Needlework. Travel: U.K. and Europe — 1963/64. Attended Anamath Yathra in Kashmir with members of Parliament. Close friend of Rao family during A. G. in South Africa. Family connec- tions with H. C. of Pakistan — Ramrathan Metha and D. K. Unbta (Major) and U. K. Meluta (Metalargy — Germany). Hans. BALWANTH Singh: b. 3rd March, 1942, Benoni, Trans- vaal. Educated: Benoni, St. Georges Mussorie, U.P., India and Newcastle-on-Tyre and Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin. Qualified, 1969. Is now at Richmond Hospital — Ireland. Interests: Soccer and Karate. IS4@

---

## Page 11

312 1IS44 SINGH, Rambajan “Gordan”: Costing Clerk. b. 2nd February, 1931, Burnside, Dundee District, Natal. Educated: Burnside Govt. Aided School. Son of M. Singh. Origin: Cawnpore, U.P., India. Was in Catering Trade, 1945/59. Bookkeeper and now Costing Clerk for Shoe Manufacturers — Katrina Shoes. Public spirited — Other Activities: Show Promoter, Magician and Ventriloquist. Was first showman in South Africa to saw woman in half with Elec. Saw without covers. Chairman: Thistle T/C; Vice President: LC.W.S. (P.M. Burg); Vice President: Allendale Ratepayers Association; Secretary: Allandale Sports Association; Treasurer: Swimming Union of Natal. Sports: Tennis, Swimming; Rec.: Travel. Married; Soo- minthra, eldest daughter of A. Sirkar of P. M. Burg; S 1; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 110, P. M. Burg — Phone: 42666; Res. Add.: 38 Helstone Road, Allandale. SINGH, Sewcharan: Businessman. b. 13th January, 1925, Pentrich, P. M. Burg, Natal. Was associated with Westons as Salesman, Des- patch Clerk and eventually as Storeman. Was part-time In- surance Agent since 1947 and opened own offices — S. Singh’s Agencies. Handles Estate Agency, Insurance Brokerage, Loan nego- tiations and Investments. Public- spirited. Is President: New Holmes Ratepayers Association; Vice President: Northdale Sanathan D. Sabha; Educational Committee Member: T.P.A. School; Hon. Secretary: Orient Park Tennis Club; Committee Member: P. M. Burg Funeral Society; Rec.: Soccer, Angling and Travel; Married: Mina- wathie, eldest daughter of O. Ramdin of Elandskop; $ 5; D 2; Bus. Add.: 552 Greytown Road, Raisethorpe, P. M. Burg, Natal; Res. Add.: 18 Cyprus Way, New Holmes, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. 1SG\ SINGH, Surujbaflie Mahas: Princi- pal — Retired. b. April, 1905. Mt. Moreland, Verulam, Natal. Edu.: Umdhloti Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Mahas Singh of Sultanpur, U.P., India. Took up teaching in 1927 and attained Principalship in 1951 at Ashville, Stanger. Began teaching at a time when there was some reluctance in sending children to school by Indian parents, particularly girls. Very active in Social, Education- al and Religious matters affecting the community. Activities: Com. Member: Verulam Deepavali Union; Trustee: V. Crema- torium Society; Treasurer and Member of working and Finance Comm.; I.C.W.S. (Verulam); Treasurer: F.O.S.A.; THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO Vice President and Member of Finance Committee; Veru- lam Clinic Board; Trustee and Secretary> Shree Gopallal Temple Committee; Patron and working Committee Mem.: Grangetown Hindi Patshalla; On working Committee: Verulam Civic Association; Member: Natal Indian Blind and Deaf Society; Rec.: Literature, Music and Travel - Toured East Coast Ports, India and Ceylon, 1962/63. Met amongst others, Jawaharlal Nehru, Pres. Radhakrishnan. Married: Dially, daughter of Late Harry Singh of Umzinto, $1;D3. Add.:-2 Ireland Street, Verulam, Natal — Phone: 2253 Ig$2 SIVANANTHAN, Hemraj (Dennis): Tailor. b. 19th Jan., 1942, Mayville, Durban. Educated: Merebank Indian School and Surat Hindu. Son of Sivinanthan of Merebank, Durban. Was associated with leading tailoring house in Durban 1958/66. Established own business — Telstar Tailors — 1966. Specialists in Bespoke tailoring. Member of Masters Tailors Association. Interested in Indian and and Western films and music. Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Bus. Add.: 419 Victoria Street — Phone: 311084, Dbn.; Res. Add.: 47 Lakhinpur Road, Merebank, Durban. \S53B SOLOMON, Abraham: School Principal. b. llth Oct., 1919, Glendale, Stanger, Natal. Edu.: Stanger. Principal: Kearsney, De- pot Road, Sastri College. Known for his school building in remote areas. Built schools in Putney- sptuit (Ladysmith) and Glenville, Stanger District. Other Activities: Member: F.O.S.A. and [.C.W.S. — Stanger, Ashville Cheer Com.; President: Natal Bap. Ind. Asso.; Kearsney Sports Cpuncil; Org. Secretary: Glendale Baptist Church; Trustee: Putneyspruit and Glenville Schools; Natal Ind. Bap. Association; Nits Invs.; Was privileged to welcome Dr. Odendale (President:Bap- tist Union of South Africa); Married: Mogiliamma That- hiah. Res. Add.: Ashville, Stanger, Natal. l\os4 SOLOMON, Samuel John: Busi- nessman. b. 12th October, 1922, Mayville, Durban. Edu.: A.Y-S. School and Cato Manor. Son of Jacob Solomon of Durban. Origin: Malayalam, Madras Presidency, India. Of humble beginning. Started work at an early age in Clothing Industry in 1938. Began at bottom of ladder — rose to Supervisor in 1958, and partner — Goodwill Clothing Co., 1963. Religiously inclined. Activities: Member: Bethesda Temple — ' Ebenezer Temple (Chatsworth) Charitable Committee; Natal Clothing Mnfrs. Association; Active in Missionary work. Rec.: Soccer and Boxing ; Married: Rajammah Moodley of Tongaat; S 3; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1686, 33 Carlisle Street — Phone: 27761, Durban; Res. Add.: Unit 2, Road 229, House No. 68, Chatsworth, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HEHEHE HEIN EE IE IE IEE HEE \$¢ss One of those who threw in his lot with the Passive Resistance struggle from its inception was. Ratanjhi Mulji Sodha, friend and compatriot of Mahatma Gandhi. Born in Rajkot, Kathiawad, India, in 1885, Ratanjhi Sodha arrived in this country in 1905. He was associated with the “Kathiawad Times” as its business Manager and once here, together with Madanjit, founded the Interna- tional Printing Works which later published the “Indian Opinion”. The Green Pamphlet, setting down the grievances of the Natal Indians was printed by him and as time went on he was drawn more and more into the vortex of the Indian struggle for recognition in this country. It was Mahatma Gandhi who had talked him into coming to this country and the association and friendship which had begun in India, developed and grew in stature in South Africa. In 1907, when the Passive Resistance movement broke out, he was one of the first to join Gandhi and courted several terms of imprisonment. His wife, Rambhabai, was the first Gujarati woman in the country to join the Passive Resis- tance Struggle. In 1911, Ratanjhi Sodha settled in the Transvaal, having qualified with six others as an educated entrant. Public spirited, Ratanjhi Sodha continued his P. R. association with the Mahatma through his two sons who were in the forefront of the struggle in 1913. He served his people unselfishly until his death in 1930. He attended the S.A.I.C. conference in Durban which was presided over by Mrs. Sarojini Naidoo in 1924. He was also the founder of the “Gujarati Samachar”. IssG@ SODHA, Rambhabai: Wife of Ratanjhi Sodha. b. Rajkot, Kathiawad, India in 1893. Died: 1928; Passive Resistor. Served prison sentence in 1909, arrest described as “War on Women” by overseas Press. \s$7 SODHA. Ravashankar: Businessman. b. 1897, Rajkot, Kathiawad. Educated: Tolstoy Farm. Arrived in this country, 1906. Joined P. R. Movement, 1911. Imprisoned 1913. Was also in forefront of Indian Independance struggle after 1914. Established Snuff Manufacturing business in Pretoria, 1931. Founder of Sodha Bros. and Sodha’s Cafe & Restaurant, 1959. Died:.13th September, 1965. HORE ERE IESE BK I HG HG BARE BK BK IB HH HEH BH BE HH HEHE HE HB I HH HEHEHE HEH HB HH SEH HH BL Bek BX BA BH HE HH BL BH I HEH HH BB BE 313 The Sodha Family of Pretoria BE HEH HE ENE KEE KEE NE ISsss SODHA, Damodardas R.: Busi- nessman. b. 23rd April, 1926, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Pri- ce mary and Alfred High, Rajkot - -_ India. Eldest son of R.R. Sodha. ame Proprietor — A.B.C. Provision Store, Pretoria. Widely travelled. General Interests; Married: Labh- kunvar V. Karsen; S 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: 149-3rd Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: 35137. Res. Add.: 299-14th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria -— Phone: 793892. Iss SODHA, Gunvantria R.: Business- man. b. 4th April, 1943, Gathila, Nagpur, India. Educated: Pretoria High and Karansi College, Rajkot, India. Second son of R. R. Sodha. Managing Director: Popular Store and Associated Director: Sodha Bros.; Sodha’s Cafe & Restaurant. Other Activities: Member: Nav- yuga Mandal, Pretoria. Manager and Treasurer: Mohawks Football Club; Married: Snelatha B. Math- uradas; S 1. Bus. Add.: 325-6th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 22383; Res. Add.: 295-14th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. | $4 SODHA, Ashok Kumar R.: Busi- nessman. b. 2nd December, 1949, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Pri- mary and Pretoria High, Damelin College. Managing Director: Sodha Bros. and Sodha’s Cafe and Res- taurant. Keen Soccerite.

---

## Page 12

314 be\| SOMA, Chuggan: Master Tailor. b. 2nd July, 1913, Ongel, District Surat, India. Edu.: Ongél and Benoni Ind./Col. School. Son of Soma Budhia. Arrived, 1924. Entered business scene, 1935 — Benoni Expert Tailors. Changed to Expert Tailors in 1955 — Mer- chant Tailors. Activities: Has offi- ciated in various sports bodies in Benoni and District; L.V-P.: Ramblers Sports Club — Benoni; Past President: Benoni Gujarati Seva Samaj, 1957/63 and at present Vice President; Was nominated I.C. Com. Member in 1966. Was re-nominated for a further term of two years, 1968/70. Member: Benoni Indian Primary School Educational Committee. Interested in all sports; Rec.: Religious Literature and Studies. Married: Maniben, daughter of Soma Kika of Matvad, India; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 5006, Benoni South. Phone: 549491; Res. Add.: Moodley St., Actonville, Benoni — No. 3 Ext., Benoni, Transvaal. \See SONI, Nanjee Devshi: Business- man. L.A.C.;. b. 20th August, 1919, Dundee, Natal. Edu.: Dun- dee Indian school. Son of Devshi Odhavjee Soni of Dundee and Porbander, Kathiawad, India and grandson of Odhavjee Valjee a pioneer of Jeweller of Dundee. Associated with family concern. Begun by Odhavjee Valjee. Direc- tor of Soni’s Silk Emporium, Son‘ Bros. and Devson Wholesale Appointed to L.A.C. by Adm. in Exec., 1966. Re-appointed for further two years, 1967/69. Was associated with various organisations over the years. Is a Treasurer of the Indian C. W. Society for the past eighteen years. Committee Member: Ramakrishna Centre — Dundee. Was a Committee Member: Northern Natal Festival Cele- bration Committee, 1966; Dundee Tennis Club. Active Tennis Player. Past Treasurer.and Member: Dundee Indian Ratepayers Association; Chairman: Local Affairs Com.; Married: Samkuar, daughter of Jivra] Soni of Durban; S 1; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 103, Dundee ~ Phone: 962. Res. Add.: 53a Wilson Street ~ Phone: 203 Dundee. \SG3 SONI, Nursee Devshi: Business- man. b. 24th August, 1916, Dun- dee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. Indian School. Joined fami- ly business — D. O. Soni — as apprentice jeweller. Now a senior partner in the firm of Soni Bros. Established, Soni’s Silk Emporium. Is also Director: Odhavjee Pro- perties. Other Activities: Patron: Past President: Dundee L.C.W.S.; Patron: Ramakrishna Centre (Dundee Branch); Past Treasurer: Northern Districts Indian Football : Association; Vice President: Dun- dee Indian Tennis Club. Has taken a keen interest in almost every local activity. Was also on deputation from THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO the Dundee Indian community to the late Jan Hofmeyer and Committee Member of numerous reception Com- mittees over the years. Keen Sportsman. Rep. Northern Natal at Soccer. Associated with local Cricket and a fine Tennis Player. Has travelled extensively, U.K., Europe, India, Middle East and African countries. Add.: 49 Wil- son Street, Dundee — P. O. Box 103 — Phone: 203. \See- SONI, Shantilal Devshi: Manufac- turing Jeweller. b. 2nd November, 1926, Dundee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. {Indian School. Son of Devshi Odhavjee. Joined Soni Bros., 1944. Now partner in the firm and Director of the family Group of Companies. Takes a keen interest in all Social, Cultural and Sports Activities. Treasurer: Dundee Indian Tennis Club; Councillor: Dundee House Child Welfare Society. He was Chairman of the Festival of the Soil Festival Committee in Dun- dee; Sports: Tennis; Add.: 49 Wilson Street, Dundee; Phone: 203. 1S6S° SONWADI, Ahmed Mohamed: Company Secretary. b. 7th April, 1926, Potchefstroom, Transvaal. Educated: Zeerust Indian School. Son of Mohamed Sonwadi. Origin: Son- wadi, District Surat, India. Joined firm of N. B. Wholesale, 1953. Is now Company Secretary. One of leading figures in public activities and sports administrator. Activities: Member: Shalimar Sports Club; Secretary: Western Trans- vaal Cricket Union (1955/57); Potchefstroom Muslim Congregation; Potchefstroom Indian Committee; Chair- man: Potchefstroom Educational Committee; Secretary: Potchefstroom Cricket Club; Rec.: Angling, Cricket and Soccer; Married: Rehmat, daughter of Hoosen Yacoob, Durban, Natal; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 990, Potchefstroom — Phone: 4381; Res. Add.: 40 Maherry Street. Potchefstroom, Transvaal. ISe6 SONVADI, Yousuf Mohamed: Businessman. b. 2nd October, 1928, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Fransvaal. Educated: Zeerust Ind. Govt. School. Son of Mohamed Essack Sonwadi. Origin: Sonwadi, - District Surat, India. Agent for Trust Bank Growth Fund. Busi- nessman — Lucky Bazaar — Vre- dedorp. Activities: F/P/Secretary: Shalimar Sporting Club Zeerust (1948/53); Secretary: Sonvadi Muslim Community (1953/70); Transvaal Parchola Muslim Asso. (1957/70); Tailmul-Islam Mosque and Madressa (1965/70); Pageview Stalihoiders and Traders Association; Member: Liason Committee Fords- burg Oriental Plaza; Organiser Secretary: Dar-ul-Aman Club; Rec.: Tennis and Religious Literature. Married: Halimabibi, daughter of Hassan Ebrahim of Pretoria. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 54061 — 61a/61b De La Rey Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg — Phone: 354478; Res. Add.: 28c — 13th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg — Phone: 355605. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO & ee fe SOOFUL, Bunvandeen: Principal. b. 9th June, 1913, Malvern, Natal. Edu.: Seaview Indian School, Higher Grade and Sastri College. Son of R. Sooful of Malvern and grandson of Sooful — U. Bihar, India. Qualifications: T3B, B.A., 1944, Teachers Diploma. Began as teacher in 1936. Was connected to various schools amongst which — Welbedacht at a salary of R10 per month. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. Is keen Member of various organisations. Connected with activities of F.0.S.A.; I.C.W.S. (Verulam) and Shree Gopalall Temple; Past Chairman: Verulam Clinic Board and is now Committee Member and Assistant Treasurer of the Board. Committee Member: Verulam Civic Asso.; Returned to Estcourt Secondary School in 1960 as Princi- pal. Rec.: Angling; Married: Sarasvathie, Sth daughter of J. Parag of Pietermaritzburg; S 1; D 4; Res. Add.: 9 Ireland Street, Verulam — Phone: 141, Verulam, Natal. IS6% SREECHAND, John L.: Land and Estate Agent and Insurance Cons.; b. lst December, 1928, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: Ester P. Smith and York Road School. Son of Latibeharie Budhoo of P. M. Burg. Was one of the younger generation of leading Land and Estate Agents in P. M. Burg. Represented Norwich Union Life Assurance Society and Union and National Insurance Company. Is a quali- fied Insurance Consultant. Activities: Past President: Raisethorp Arya Samaj; Nishan Theatrical Entertainers; Hindu Prayer Circle; Patron: Tamil Educational] Society; Ramakrishna Centre. Now settled in Durban; Sports: Tennis, Cricket and Swimming; Rec.: Literature, Music and Travel. Married: Dularie Sarju of Pietermaritzburg; $1;D 3. Res. Add.: Durban. 1S$69 SUBRATI, Yacob A. B.: b. 27th October, 1925, Durban. Educated: Anjuman Islam, May Street, Greyville Govt. School. Son of Abou-Baker Subrati. Origin: Shahratgunj, Bihar, India. Businessman. Joined Mayville Clothing as Cleaner in 1941. Graduated to Cutter and is now Chief Cutter for the last twenty years. Is also Managing Director of Mayville Co.; Activities: Member: Mobeni Heights Muslim Association; Travel: Swaziland, P.E.A. and the Republic of South Africa; Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Married: Momeen, daughter of Dawood Rawat of Mooi River; S 5; D 4. Bus. Add.: 228 Dunbar Road, Mayville, Dunbar — Phone: 888576; Res. Add.: 2 Oribi Circle, Mobeni Heights, Durban. Isto SUJAN, Gayapersadh: Principal. b. 15th March, 1913, Amatikulu, Natal (Zululand). Educated: Amatikulu and Nonoti. Son of Sujan of Srimatura, Agra, India. Began school teaching career in 1928. Taught unbroken thirty eight years at Nonoti. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. One of rare breed of teachers in 315 the Province — entirely self-taught. Activities: Member: Stanger Indian Child Welfare Society. Very keen Angler ~ Soccer and Hunting. Intevested in all Communal, Educa- tional and Social Activities in the Nonoti area.. Married: Koosmee, daughter of Ramdhanie of Sans Sonci; § 3; D 2. All three sons in teaching profession; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 195, Stanger — Phone: 1412, Darnell; Res. Add.: Nonoti; Phone: 1412, Darnell. is SULIMAN, Omarjee Ahmed: Radiotrician — Electrical Wireman — Cine. Engineering; b: Paguthan, District Bharoach, India. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Son of Ahmed Suliman. One of leading Social and Welfare workers in Pretoria and District. Served on the Johannes- burg and Pretoria Indian Festival Committees — Fifth Anniversary; Rep. of S.A. — 1966; Was Chairman: Tech. Div. — Rep. Festival. Was honoured with presentation of Rep. Medal for services rendered. Other Activities: Treas.: Pretoria Islamic Society; Executive Committee Member: Laudium Mosque Project Committee; Member and Chair- man: Education Committee — Pretoria Indian Boys State High School; Member of various other local organisations and societies. Hobby: Electronics and Allied fields. Married: Amina Essop Mohamed Patel; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: 378-7th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: Fo Add.: 377-7 th Street, Asiatic Bazaar — Phone: IS 72, SULEMAN, Sadek Dawood: Busi- nessman. b. 17th June, 1935, Durban, Natal. Educated: Drift School, Umkomaas and Naidoo Memorial. Son of Dawood Sule- man. Origin: Porbandar, Kathia- wad, India. Was previously in family business at Umkomaas — Drift Butchery. Established Uni- versal Chair and Tarpaulin Hire in 1965. One of leading firms in the country. Activities: Member: Isipingo Beach Ratepayers Asso.; Interested in all local activities. Travel: India, Pakistan, Mauritius, P.E.A. and Kenya. Married: Kairoonisha Abdul Hamid; $2; D1. Bus. Add.: 72 Soupon Road, Clairwood — Phone: eee Res. Add.: 4-Sth Avenue, Isipingo Beach; Phone: 570. IS 73 SURAJBALLI, Ramsumer: Social Worker. b. 6th June, 1927, Merebank, Durban, Natal. Educated: Merebank Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Surajballi of Merebank — Durban. Was Trade Union Secretary in the Durban area. Now full-time Social Worker in Umzinto District attached to Umzinto Indian C. W. S.; Record Clerk: F.O.S.A. (1964/68). Was also Member of various Social, Educa- tional and Political bodies in the Durban area. Keen Angler. Married: Sithapathy, daughter of M. Durga of Port Shepstone; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 44, Umzinto; Phone: 199; Res. Add.: Off Main Road, Umzinto, Natal.

---

## Page 13

316 The Surtees of Johannesburg \O16 MOHAMED, Ebrahim Surtee: Director of Companies. b. 27th February, 1931. Educated: Bree Street and Johan- nesburg High School. Eldest son of Ebrahim Essop Surtee of Johannesburg; Director: Surtee’s of Vrededorp and 38 Market Street, Johannesburg; Married: Hawa; S 1; Dil. Sports: Bowls, Tennis and Swimming. Interests: Social Work and Religion. Travel: U.K., Europe, Middle East and £.A,; Bus. Add.: 33 Commissioner Street, Johannes- burg — Phone! 8368951/2; Res. Add.: 83a Crown Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8382046. (ot? AHMED, Ebrahim Essop Surtee: B.A. (S.A.) and L.L.B.; Born: 12th May, 1936. Educated: Bree Street, Johannes- burg High School. Second son of Ebrahim Essop Surtee of Johannesburg; Died: 8th November, 1969, London. THE SOUTHERN aes INDIAN WHO'S WHO . SURTEE, Ebrahim Essop: Busi- nessman. b. 3rd March, 1916, Sim- lak, Navsari, India. Educated: =-\> Govt. Indian School, Johannes- burg and Navsari. Son of Essop Ebrahim Surtee. Origin: Simlak, Navsari, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1908. Returned to India in 1930 for studies. Established the business of Surtee’s of 14th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg in 1934. One of leading firms of Outfitters in Johannesburg — White or Non-white. Established Surtee’s of Market Street, Johannesburg, 1950. Widely travelled: U.K., Europe, Middle East, India, Pakistan, East Africa. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Rec.: Cricket; Married: Fathima; S 4; D 1. Bus, Add.: 33 Com- missioner Street, Johannesburg — Phone: 8468951/2; Res. Add.: 36 Lovers Walk, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone 8345686. ie SULEMAN, Essop Surtee: Direc- tor of Companies. b. 12th March, 1927, Rustenburg, Transvaal. Educated: Bree Street, Johannes- burg. Youngest son of Late Essop E. Surtee of Rustenburg. Direc- tor: Surtees — Vrededorp and 38 Market Street, Johannesburg and subsidiary companies. Member: C.I.T.; Sports: Tennis; Bus. Add.: 33 Commissioner Street, Johan- nesburg; Res. Add.: 52 Commer- cial Road, Johannesburg — Phone: 8368951/2 and 8384787. \le718 ABOOBAKER, Ebrahim Surtee: b. 4th November, 1941, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Educated: Bree Street, Johannes- burg High School. Third son of Ebrahim Essop Surtee of Johannesburg; Director of Companies: Surtee’s — Vrede- dorp and 38 Market Street, Johannesburg; Married: Zu- beida (B.A. Honours — Social Work), daughter of Late Essop Ismail Mia of Johannesburg; Interests: Travel: EXt., Europe, U.K., U.S.A., India, Pakistan, Middle East and E.A., Canada; Bus. Add.: 33 Commissioner Street, Johan- nesburg — Phone: 8368951/2; Res. Add.: 36 Lovers Walk, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8345686. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA ae WHO'S WHO SULTAN, Mahoméd Ebrahim: Director of Companies. b. 14th November, 1923, Escombe, Natal. Educated: Malvern, Sastri, Fort Hare and Wits. Son of Mulak- mahomed Lappa Sultan of Quilon, Malabar, South India. Manufactur- er and Wholesaler. One of out- standing men of the Indian com- munity in Social, Cultural, Educa- tional and Welfare fields. Is an office bearer in numerous organi- sations amongst which, Trustee: Malvern Islamic Madressa — Queensburgh; Overport Islamic Madressa Trust; Muslim Home for Orphans and Destitute (La Mercy); Durban Indian Child Welfare Society (also President). President: Indian Committee — South African National Council for Child Welfare. Vice President: Dur- pan Indian Benevolent Society; Durban Association for the Aged. Secretary/Treasurer: M. L. Sultan Charitable and Educational Trust (was its first Chairman). Chairman: Mariam Bee Sultan Charitable Trust; Malvern Indian Schools’ Association; Member: Advisory Council of the ‘Durban-Westville University. Also President of the South African Indian Library Association. Interested in the breeding of Game, Birds and Tropical Fish. Horticulture. Rec.: Bridge, Radio and the Cinema. Married: Hawa Ismail Adam of Johannesburg; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: 106 Victoria Street, Durban -- Phone: 60016; Res. Add.: 15 Shering- ham Road, Overport, Durban — Phone: 884667. 1S SO SEEDAT, Mahomed, Ismail. Dr. Medical Practitioner. Edu.: Dundee High School., N.U.C., M.B., Ch.B. Served. internship at Edendale- Hospital, P.M. Burg. Now practis- ing at Volksrust. Interested in all local activities..Keen tennis player. Add: Volksrust. 3-4 317 SURASPAL, Mahadeo (Bully): Accountant. b. 29th August, 1929, Buffelsdraai, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Moonsamy School, Upper Inanda and Union College (Ext.). Son of Surajpal Ganesh of Buffelsdraai, Verualm. Origin: Balia, U.P., India. Was previously associated with the Verulam Box Factory, Verulam with whom he worked for ten years. Joined the Indian Blind Society in Durban in 1962. Is now the Society’s Accountant for the last eight years. Takes keen interest in all Ind. activities. Rec.: Soccer, Angling. Married: Shakunthala, daughter of Mrs. and the Late C. G. Singh of Greytown;.S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1109 — Phone: 25882 and 64844, Durban; Res. Add.: Buffelsdraai, Verulam, Natal. isw2 SITARAM. Ramsuran. Farmer. B: 1910, Shongweni, Natal. Edu.: Wyebank NtL., Orig.: U.P., India. Wellknown farmer in Pinetown’s Stockville area. One of leading market flower growers in Ntl. Settled in the Pinetown area some 40 yrs. ago. Act.: Past Pres.: Gillitts Edu. Soc., Grantee: Gillitts S.A. Sch. (1949/60). A leading member in all Cultural & Educational acts. M.: Thunpathi Sewrathan of Hillary. S 4. D 6. Far. add.: Stockville, Gillits, Nel. ISZ3z SOODAMA, Ramlall. Farmer. B: Natal North Coast. Wellknown in the Maidstone area of the Natal North Coast. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Mem.: Indian Mill Group. Add.: P.O. Box 12, Maidstone, Natal. cer em 1c cr a 1 CNT OS UND PM A 1-DAY PAS >-<GREN D-NED )-E -N)- E “THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO” i advertising pages reach men at the top. Make use of them. | ® A HA. HD ER,

---

## Page 14

an is¢4 TALWANSINGH, Jaidoo Ravikrishna: Sugar Planter. b. 24th August, 1912, Temple Valley, Verulam, Natal. Edu.: Umdhloti Govt. Aided School, Carlisle Street and Sastri College. Son of Ravikrishna Talwantsingh. Instrumental in family negotiations in donating land for present S. Gopallal State Aided School and Talwantsingh School. Activities: Secretary and Trustee: Shree Gopallal Hindu Temple; Chairman: Temple Valley — Charnhood Civic Association; Management Board: Verulam Civic Association; Central and Ex. Member: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association, Shree Gopallal State Aided School (School Fund Com- mittee); Patron: Temple Valley Sports and Social Club; Rec.: Music, Fishing, Cricket, Tennis. Married: Shiromonie Bhoola Singh; S 4; D 4. Res. Add.: Temple Valley, Veru- lam — Phone: 208; Res. Add.: P. O. Box 3, Verulam, Natal — Phone: 208. ISes” TARMOHAMED, Abdool Satar: Businessman. b. 15th August, 1934, Ranavav, Saurastra, India. Edu.: Standerton Govt. School. Son of T. M. Hingwala. Origin: Ranavav, India. Established business of Omar & Co. — Brits — 1953. Is in partnership with brothers, Anwer and Omar. Is also Director of O. K. Stores (1964), Brits. Activities: Com- mittee Member: Brits Mohammedan Madressa. Keen on all Local Culture, Religion and Social Activities. Rec.: Cricket and Welfare Work; Married: Kulsum, daughter of N. M. Ebrahim of Johannesburg; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: 20 Town Street, Brits — Phone: 433; Res. Add.: Crocodile Street, Brits — Phone: 432. (SSB TARMOHAMED, Ismail: Busi- nessman and Local Affairs Coun- cil. b. 26th February, 1922, Dun- dee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Indian School. Son of Late I.Tar Mohamed of Dundee and Aliabad, Kathiawad, India — a pioneer of early Dundee — came as a trader in 1885. Prominent businessman of Dundee. Director of Ismail’s Taxi Service, A. Mohamed Pro- perties, Khaleck Investments — Dundee. Public Relations Officer: Hadumail Motors — Dundee. Takes a keen interest in all local affairs. Was appointed to Local Affairs Committee by Adminis- trator in-Executive in 1966. Elected to L.A.C. for further two years at the polls ~ 1967/69. Other Activities — Committee Member: I.C.W. Society; Dundee and District Muslim Society; Dundee Mosque/Islamic Madressa Trust; Dundee Madressa School; Dundee High School Fund Committee; Dundee High School Educational Committee; Dundee Madressa Fund Committee; Dundee Indian Rate- payers Association; Dundee Parent/Teachers Association; Dundee Soil Festival Committee; Dundee Republican Committee. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ) ‘fo TAVARIA, Dara Kooverji: Businessman. b. 24th June, 1916, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Educated: Johannesburg Govt. Indian School; Tata School, Navsari, India. Son of Kooverji Tavaria. Origin: Navsari, India. Previously traded in Bombay — Tavaria Bros. Returned to South Africa, 1953. Established Tavaria Clothing Mnfrs. (1959). Acts.: Past Secretary and Chairman: Transvaal Parsi Association; Past Chairman: Ramakrishna Religious and Cultural Academy; Executive Member: Transvaal Buzme Adab: Vice Chairman: Mahatma Gandhi Centenary Celebration Committee; Executive Member: Transvaal Mahatma Centenary Council; Rec.: Indian Classical Music and Travel Travelled India, East Africa, P-E.A., Rhodesia and Zambia. Married: Alla, daughter of Dosabhai Bodhanwalla of Bod- han, India; S 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 42264, Fords- burg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8387901; Res. Add.: 30 Wolhuter Street, Ferreirastown, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Ise TAYOB, Abdool Aziz Ahmed: Architect — B. Arch. (Rand). b. 10th August, 1941, Pietersburg, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Son of Ahmed A. M. Tayob. Origin: Ranavav, India. Qualified as Archi- tect, 1969. Only Indian Architect in the Republic. Took up Medical studies in Pakistan but returned to South Afri- ca as a result.of ill-health and graduated as S.A.’s. First Indian Architect. Is at present studying for Associate Membership of Royal Inst. of British Architects. Acts.: Was Secretary: Muslim Relief Society (1960/67); Member: Inst. of South African Architects. Entered for the Association of the Royal Inst. of British Architects. Married: Khairoonisha; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 129, Brits, Transvaal — Phone: 190; Res. Add.: 16a-20th St., Vrededorp, Johannesburg — Phone: 353970. \SE9 THEBA, Moosa Essa Ismail: Busi- nessman. b. 20th December, 1930, Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Indian Govt. School. Fourth son of Essa Ismail Theba. Origin: Tankaria, Barooch, India. First began as Retailer — 1951, A. & N. Supply Store. Established Fordsburg Wholesalers in 1958. Active Social, Cultural and Religi- ous worker. Other Activities: Member: Nirvana High School — Educational Committee; Lenasia Primary School Edu. Commit- tee; Vice Chairman: Lenasia Hearse and Cemetery Committee; Ex. Member: Noor-ul-Islam Mosque and Madressa; Trustee of Aligarh Old Boys Association; Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Traveli World Tour (1969/70). East and Central African Territories. Married: Fatima, daughter of Mrs. and Late Mr. Alibhay Dudia of Rustenburg; S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: 72 Avenue Strect, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8347024; Res. Add.: 117-Nirvana Drive, Lenasta — Phone: Phone: 215. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 319 35 SEK HERE HE TEL HK KK: isgo AMBARAM, Thaker arrived in this country in 1896 on board the s.s. Corland. He had distinguished company on the trip in the per- son of Mahatma Gandhi. Little is known of his early activities here. He was born in India in 1855 and died in 1929 at the age of seventy four. So THAKER, Harilal A.: Retired Businessman. b. 2nd May, 1895 at Rajkot, India. Educated: Matricu- lated -— Bhavnager, India. Was Wholesale Merchant. Established H. A. Thaker (1925). Other Acts.: Was Treasurer: South African Hindu Mahasabha; Natal Indian Congress. Trustee: Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; Past Secretary: Kathiawad Arya Mandal. Was one of principal contributors to Phoenix Settlement — Mahatma Gandhi Anniversary, 1969. Married: Diwali D. A. Bhatt; S 2; Res. Add.: Flat 1, 227 Grey Street, Durban — Phone: 24170. The Thaker Family of Durban HE HETIL HE HI HEH NE HBB EH HBB HEH BB HE HHH BH HH BH EH IO BNE BOI BHO BBE NE BBB HOB BB HE HE BA BH HH BB HK OK PX ISaq THAKER, Shashikant N.: Spray Painter. b. 26th December, 1949, Durban. Educated: Durban. Eldest son of Natwarlal H. Thaker. Pro- prietor: Regal Spray Works, Dbn. HH ERE RE HAH REL EK NK 1IS1% THAKER, Shankerlal H.: Medical Practitioner. b. July, 1923, Dur- ban. Educated: Durban and Madras University, India. Now practicing at King Edward VIII; Secretary: Kathiawad Seva Samaj; Married: Jayadevi; S 2. Ios THAKER, Natwarlal H.: Garage Proprietor. b. 27th January, 1927, Rajkot, India. Educated: Durban and India. Married: Ansuya; S 2; D3.

---

## Page 15

320 The Thakurdin Family of Merrivale ISAS THAKURDIN, Soomanthree: b. 1897, Ladysmith. Fourth daugh- ter of Bhundarie Lakpathia — lived the greater part of her life in the Richmond area. Died at Eden- dale in 1958. ISsd¢ THAKURDIN, Champawathi : Director of Companies; b. 23rd May, 1933, Sans Souci, Natal. Second daughter of D. R. Brij- mohan and wife of R. Thakurdin. Educated: Stanger High School. Entered business scene, 1950 — 1955. Later Director: Merrivale Central Store. Other Activities: Chairlady: Indian Womens Asso.; Secretary: Indian Child Welfare Society — Howick West Branch. Also connected w.. . various other local Social, Cultural and Public Activities. R. Thakurdin Bros.; Director until + THE SOUTHERN ate INDIAN WHO'S WHO Born in Ayodhya District, U.P., India in 1875, Thakurdin Suchit came to this country as an inden- tured immigrant and served on a farm in the Richmond area for ten years. In 1903, he joined the N.G.R. which later became the S.A.R. & H. and remained with the Railways for thirty five years until his retirement. Towards the end of his days he was in business both as a Hawker and Trader in the Merrivale area. He died on the 5th March, 1957. esti ® THAKURDIN, Ramharak: b. 30th September, 1921, Richmond, Ntl. Educated: Richmond Primary and Indaleni. Son of Thakurdin Suchit. Joined J. Patraj & Co., Riversdale} Merrivale, 1945. Established R. Thakurdin Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. in partnership with brothers in J 946, and was the firm’s Managing Di- rector until 1952. Presently, Sole Proprietor — Cosmo Supermarket, Cosmo Cash Store, Cosmo Cafe & Cosmo Cinema at Howick West. Other Activities: Trustee and Grantee: Howick West Indian School; President: Howick West and District Indian Educational Committee; Chait- man: Howick West Civic Association; Divine Life Asso- ciation — Howick West Branch; Travel: Rhodesia, Zambia, Nyasaland and P.E.A. Keen student of Yoga. Add.: P.O. Box 137, Merrivale, Natal — Phone: 304 (Howick). “ey THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIA a gees WHO THEBA, Mohamed Essa: Business- man. b. 12th October, 1923, Pre- toria, Transvaal. Edu.: Pretoria Indian Govt. School. Son of Essa Ismail Theba. Origin: Tankaria, Barooch, India. Joined family concern of Theba’s Wholesale & Retail Fruit (1936). Now Sole Owner. Took an active part as Administrator and Player of vari- ous Sports; Past Treasurer: Pre- toria Islamic Society; President: Tankaria Muslim Educational and Welfare Society (Tvl.); Mem.: Pretoria Islamic Society; Pretoria Asiatic Stall Holders Association; Treasurer: Pretoria Mus- lim Study Group; Rec.: Cricket, Soccer and Angling; Married: Amina, daughter of Essackjee Suleman Patel of L.M.; S 5; D 3. Bus. Add.: Stall 13, Indian Market, Pre- toria — Phone: 33901; Res. Add.: 273-17th Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. THIMBEERAN, Subramony: Es- tate Agent. b. 6th Nov., 1904, Isipingo Rail, Natal. Educated: Isipingo Indian School. Son of Late Thimbeeran of Madras Pres., India. Estate Agent since 1948 — under Economic Agencies in the Isipingo Rail area. Well-known and influential figure in local set-up. Is a Member appointed by the Ad- ministrator — Isipingo Rail Ind. ‘Affairs Committee. First appoint- ed 1966 and re-appointed in 1967 for a further period of two years. A founder of the Northdene Ind. School and first Grantee. Holds School and first Grantee. Holds various Sporting and Educational posts along the South Coast. Appointed Trustee of Gokul State Aided School — Isipingo Rail, 321 1963; Past Chairman: Ratepayers Association — seventeen years; Vice Chairman: Isipingo Beach Club. Presented various Trophies — Soccer, Cricket and Athletics to Schools and Sports bodies; F/President: S.C.D.LF.A. & C.U. Was previously associated with African Explo. for twenty years. Married: Dhanam, daughter of Chinnien of Clairwood; S 1; D 5; Rec.: Travel and Literature. Toured India — 1957; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 15, Isipingo Rail, Natal — Phone: 91268; Res. Add.: Isipingo Beach (24 Ocean Terrace) — Phone: 91546. joo! TOOTLA, Hajee Ismail Cassim: Businessman. b. 10th Oct., 1910, Diva, District Barooch, India. Educated: . Higher Grade Indian School. Son.of Hajee Cassim Hoosen Tootla of New Hanover and Diva, District Barooch, India. Joined father in business in 1927. Previously traded in Tugela area — North Coast, from 1914. Is now sole proprietor — C. Hoosen & Sons. Also runs local garage — New Hanover Service Station. Activities; Was Past Secretary: New Han- over Madressa; Past Chairman: New Hanover Football Association. Keen Soccerite in younger days. Travel: Toured India, Pakistan, Middle East, African countries and Mecca — 1965. Married: Rassool, daughter of E. C. Chenia of Vereeniging; S 3; D 4; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 4, Phone: 8, New Hanover; Res. Add.: Schroeders Road, New Hanover — Phone: 8. jgo2 TILLY, Yusuf Mohamed: Businessman; b. 1914, Klerks- dorp, Transvaal. Educated: Gaddiala HIgh School, Kathor, India. Son of Mohamed Tilly. Origin: Kholvad, India. With modest beginnings in 1942 he established Cash Store (1942) and later, Fashion House. Activities: Was a Member and Branch Secretary: Transvaal Indian Congress; Was Past Secretary: Burgershoop Mosque and Madressa Trust; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Billiards; Married: Ayesha, daughter of Late Ebrahim M. Kajee of Kholvad, India; S 1; Bus. Add.: 196a Commissioner St., Burgershoop — Phone: 6602894; Res. Add.: 22 President Street, Krugersdorp — Phone: 6602894. | | i cae net nen event cen THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN “WHO'S WHO" The only publication of its kind in Southern Africa which provides for personalities in every field of Indian activity. When you think of advertising — there is no better medium at ND NPL YA DAD ATA A > DC SC 1S DA RN amt HO > PsN DED PND GEE O-F >-GE D-IND Y-G >E )-ERY Y-CENED 1 +-C #-EDA > EDN, mm a 1: RN EE PE SM ID

---

## Page 16

322 kos VAHED, Ahmed Sadek: Director of Companies. b. 22nd Nov., 1934, Durban. Educated: Greyville Govt. Indian School. Third son of Ismail Ahmed Vahed of Kathor, District Surat, India. Served his apprentice- ship at Lockhat Bros. after school hours. Was on permanent staff, 1950/54. Joined Mohamed Ismail & Co., 1954. Solely instrumental in developing the firm’s entry into the clothing field. Rose to posi- g tion of Managing Director with — the advent of Kingsgate Clothing into the manufactured clothing field. Kingsgate was established in 1955. Also Director of Mahomed Ismail & Co.; Majestic Clothing Mnfrs.; Pan-af Clothing Mnfrs.; Metropolitan Shirt; Rec.: World Affairs and Literature. Widely travelled: U.S., Canada, U.K. and Europe. Married: Zubeida A. M. Moola of Durban; S 1; D. 4. Bus. Add.: 27 Leopold Street, Durban — Phone: 65141/317147; Res. Add.: 140 Roslyn Avenue, Ashetrville, Durban — Phone: 884414. \eot VAHED, Mohamed Hoosen: Accountant and Local Affairs Member; b. Ist January, 1898, Pinetown, Natal. Edu.: Hoover School and Durban Higher Grade — M.A.O. Col- lege. Aligarh Muslim University. Son of Hoosen Vahed of Kathor, District Surat, India. Is attached to a well-known firm of Retailers at Estcourt as accountant. Joined firm of E. M. Haffejee in 1958. Takes keen interest in all Public Affairs, Activities: Vice Chairman: Local Indian Affairs Committee. Was first appointed in 1966. Previously, a leading member of the Pinetown Indian Community; Past Chairman: Pinetown Madressa Trust; Past Hon. Sec.: Mohammedan Society. and Pinetown Health Com. Is a Member of the Estcourt Muslim Society; Was an Imam and Principal at the Estcourt Madressa for many years. Was also attached to: Evaton Muslim Educational Institute as Principal. Rec.: Cultural and Religious studies. Married: Zainab, daughter of Late M. Safejee of Kathor and Cal- cutta, India. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13, Estcourt — Phone: 13; Res. Add.: 178 Alfred Street, Estcourt — Phone: 601. \eos VALODIA, Narsi Govind: Businessman. b. 26th Nov., 1909, Navsari, Baroda State, India. Educated: Newclare C, Govt. School, Bree Street, School. Son of Govind Dullabh Valodia. Origin: Navsari, India. Was one of prominent Social and Cultural workers in Johannesburg. Member of various organisations. Arrived in South Africa, 1914. Business established in partnership with brothers, Magabhai, 1935. Activities: Founder, Secretary, Treasurer, and Chairman: Star of India Cricket Club (1934); Was Member and Chairman: Johannesburg Rajput Mandal; Johannesburg Rajput Yuvak Mandal (Founder and Sec- retary) 1926; Transvaal Rajput Mandal (Founder and first Chairman, 1943); Founder and Chairman: S.A. — Rhodesia Rajput Mandal; Member: Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; Foundation Member: Wits Indian Council Union (1934). Rec.: Religious studies. Married: Dhaiben, daughter of Lala Makan of Nadod, Maroli, Baroda State, India; S 7; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 6352; 44a Market Strect, Johannesburg — Phone: 8344810; Res. Add.: 35 Pine Avenue, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8344810. ;@ VALLIE, Mohamed: Businessman. b. 27th August, 1925, Cape Town. Cape Province. Educated: Muir St. Muslim School and Trafalgar High. Son of Ismail Vallie. Origin: Ma- nuber, India. Entered business scene — 1937. Established Empire Farm Fruiterers — Retail Greens & Vegetables. The Wholesale section was added on in 1940. One of leading distributors in the Cape. Parow Fruit & Vegetable Market was established in 1951. Activities: Chairman: Young Kannumia Muslim Association; Kannumia Muslim League (Cape); Manuber Madressa Anjuman Islam, Trustee: Zinna-tul Islam Mosque, Muir Street, Cape Town. Rec.: Islamic Studies and Travel, Married: Amina, daughter of Adam Mohamed Chibutu, L.M.; S 3. Bus. Add.: 37 Selkirk Street, Cape Town — Phone: 31129; Res. Add.: 39 Selkirk Street, Cape Town, Phone: 31129. l@e7 VALLEY, Hajee Alli, Ebrahim: Businessman — Retired. b. 1887, Vorasamne, Barooch District, In- 4 dia. Educated: Vorasoomne, India. wy THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN ee. WHO r £o t Eldest son of Ebrahim Vally. Ori- I gin: Vorasoomne, India. Settled in TN feat p Lichtenburg (1927) and estab. his first business as a trader in the Diamond Fields. One of the abid- ing incidents in Valli’s life was the shooting of De La Rey at Laang- laagte. He was present at the scene, his store at Laanglaagte was just opposite the spot where the incident took place. He established a cate in Lichtenburg in 1947 and a store in 1962 which is one of the leading retail business in town. He remembers the Gandhi era in the Transvaal and incidents in the first world war when ships were under a black out between 1914/1918 when he visited India. Activities: Arrived in South Africa in 1904 and settled in Johannesburg. After some years as a Pumpman in the Gold Mines (Florida), he entered the Wholesale fruit trade in Johannesburg in 1913 as A. E. Valli. He was for sometime in Heidelburg after-a short visit to India. After a second visit to India in 1924 and a short stay in Johannesburg, he eventually moved to Lichtenburg in 1927; Rec.: Angling, Gardening. Married: Fathima, daughter of Dadabhay Essa of Varo, Barooch, India. Add.: P. O. Box 1, Bakerville, Transvaal — Phone: 1902. | Oo? VALLABH, Choonilal: Businessman. b. 3rd August, 1923, Kachhiawadi, District Navsari, India. Educated: Bree St. Govt. School. Son of Vallabh Bhaga Patel. Origin: Kach- hiawadi, India. Arrived in South Africa, 1930. Joined firm of Fresh Produce Districts (1946) as Director. Suppliers of Fresh Produce to all parts of the Republic. Keen on all local activities. Activities: Member: Trani... United Patidar Society; Transvaal Fresh Produce Whole- sale Association; Travel: U.K., Europe, Middle East, African countries and India. Interests: Indian Classical Music, Travel. Married: Ambaben Lalla Bhowan of Khad- supa, Navsari, India. Bus. Add.: P. O. 30a 42114, Fords- burg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8342477; Res. Add.: 21-71 Crown Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — Phone: 8342477. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO mt w ™ hed bd % 3 x Ld x x me lco4 HARAKCHAND, Vallabhjee: Ma- nufacturing Jeweller. b. 1874 at Patnvaw, Kathiawad, India. Educated: Vernacular — India. Arrived in South Africa in 1898 and settled in Verulam. Moved to Tongaat in 1902 and established his first business as Vallabhjee Harakchand in Tongaat’s Main Street. One of early manufacturing jewellers on the North Coast. Supported many deserving causes in the town and he was deeply religious. He was educated in mi India and was a master Crafts- man in his trade. He was born in Patanvaw, India, in 1882 and died in Tongaat in 1945 at the age of seventy one. He took a keen interest in all local activities over the years and was a Member of the Veshwaroop Temple Congrega- tion — Tongaat; Rec.: Religiously inclined. Married: Jay- koor, daughter of Thrikamjee of Sonosara, India; $ 4; D 2. {610 NEALCHAND, Vallabhjee: Manu- facturing Jeweller. b. 15th Oct., 1913, Tongaat; Natal. Educated: Tongaat Indian School, Marine College, Durban; Alfred High School, Rajkot, India. Son of Vallabhjee Harakchand, Joined family business, 1930 — Vallabh- jee Harakchand. The firm took on » the name of Vallabhjee & Sons the sameyear. Also Director: Vallabh- jee’s Jewellery Shop. One of early pioneering jewellers on the North repens nes 1898. Travel: India, ast ri ZA. and other countries in Pears ea A ratiSonioes “femorial Shield — Tongaat Footbal} Association, 1945. activities: Committee Member: Tengaat Junior School — Educational Committee; Member: Indian Ratepayers Association — Tongaat; South African Jewellers Associa- tion; Patron: Tongaat Football Association; Rec:: Soccer; Married: Narabdah, daughter of Harakchand Samjee of Majvedi, India; S 5;.D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 57, Tongaat, Hig Res. Add.: Ridge Street, Tongaat — Phone: xt. : 323 PERRENE NA VERE RET SERRE eo RA PSE IIOP EO SERENE aes ee ERE HSH SPEC EOS MANES RTI i me The Vallabhjee Family of Tongaat 0 JOE DEI EES IE SEE REIN EE HE ESE SE NE SE ESE BSE EHS DY BB SO ISB I I IE x ERE MEK MEL EEE }o1) CHOONILAL, Nealchand Vailabh- jee: Manufacturing Jeweller. b. 26th June, 1935, Tongaat. Edu.: Tongaat Indian School and Indian Engraving Art College. Son of Nealchand Vallabhjee. Origin: Junaghad, Kathiawad, _ India. Joined family business in 1955 — Vallabhjee’s Jewellery shop. One of Directors of the firm. Travel: India, U.K., Europe, Far East, E.A,; P.E.A. and African countries. Activities: Member: Tongaat Ind. Ratepayers Association; Tongaat re Indian Civic Association; South African Jewellers Association; Rec.: Soccer; Married: Ramadevi, daughter of R. Roopnarain of Tongaat; S 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 57, Ridge Street, Tongaat — Phone: 137; Res. Add.: 25 Ridge St., Tongaat; Phone: Ext. 157. lela JASWANTHRAI, Nealchand Val- labhjee: Chemist (Pharmaceutical) University College, Dublin — B.Sc. Pharmacy. Qualified 1966. Became a Member of the Pharmaceutical Society, freland, 1967. Member of the P.-S. of South Africa, 1968. Travel: U.K., Europe, India, P.E.A.. E.A. and — African countries. Activities: Member: Indian Ratepayers Association — Tongaat; Treasurer: Civic Asso., Tongaat. Rec,: Soccer and Cricket. Married: Chandraprabha, daughter of N,N. Desai of Durban; S 1;'D 1. Bus. Add.: Tongaat Pharmacy, Tongaat — Phone: 29; Res. Add.: Ridge Street, Tongaat — Phone: Ext. 29.

---

## Page 17

324 \6 {3 VANDAYAR, Namaswayan: Busi- nessman. b. 11th March, 1939, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. Educated: Hindu Primary and South End High. Son of P. R. Vandayar. Entered business scene 1956. Is in Sole charge — Imperial Grocers, since 1957. Self-service stores. Is also associated with Imperial Fruiterers. Activities: Plays Cricket for Regent Sports Club. Assistant Secretary: S. S. Aulayam — (Hindu Religious Society); Port Elizabeth Indian Civic Association; Asst. Secretary; Port Elizabeth Indian Welfare Society; Treasurer: Regents Sports Club and Saraswathi Educational Fund; Rec.: Travel and Cricket. Married: Kamlamani, daughter of Late Mr. M. S. Naicker of Sea View, Durban; S 1; D 1, Bus, Add.: 130 Russel Road, Port Elizabeth — Phone: 25720. Res, Add.: 91 Russel Road, Port Elizabeth — Ph. 24113. iol VARACHIA, Mohamed Rashid: Director of Companies. b. 12th October, 1915, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Educated: Bree Street Govt.. School. Son of Ahmed Suleman Varachia. Origin: Lach- ore, India. Was associated with arachia Bros., 1945/60. Estab. M. R, Varachia (Pty.) Ltd., 1960. Leading Sports personality and Social Worker, Activities: Has been Secretary and President: Muslim Social Welfare Fund; President: Lachpore Muslim Association — District Surat, India (1963/70); Trustee and Executive Member: C.I.T. and Chairman of of the Bursary Committee; Vice President: Social and Khabrestan Committee; Trustee: Nana Memorial Trust; Associated with numerous other Social, Religious and Educational Organisations. Was also connected with the Johannesburg Indian Social Welfare Association and Vice President, Treasurer and Committee Member over the years. Cricket: F/Member: South African Cricket Board of Control (1950); President and Secretary — over the years — S.A.C.B.C.; Was President and Secretary: S.Ad.C.U.; President: Transvaal Cricket Federation (1967/ 70); Instrumental in bringing about the Kenya Tour to and from South Africa; National Selector (1956 and 1958); Responsible for West Indies Tour. — cancelled for political reasons. Trustee and Treasurer: Johannesburg Indian Sports Ground Association; Rec.: Cricket and Travel. Travelled: Extensive ~ Europe, U.K., India, Pakistan, African countries. Married: Kathija S. Haffejee; S 1;D 2. Bus. Add.: 25a Commissioner Street, Johannesburg — Phone: 8345581; Res. Add.: 272 Main Road, Fordsburg, Johannesbutg — Phone: 8341679. ” \G1S VARMA, Ramantal Ranchodjee: Manufacturer: b. 10th October, 1923, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. Educated: Weis Primary School. Son of Ranchodjee G. Varma. Origin: Bulsar; District Surat, India. Entered business scene 1947 —R.G: Varma & Sons. Established Goldfield Sandal Manufacturers, 1952. One of pioneers in the ficid THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO amongst Indians. Activities: Past Chairman: Yuvac Mandal, Port Elizabeth; Past Vice Chairman: Kshattriya Mandal, Port Elizabeth; Member: Aryan Sports Club; Hindu Seva Samaj, Port Elizabeth Indian Civic Association; Rec.: Classical Music, Religious and Philosophy Literature. Married: Nirmala Girdharlal K. Chouhan of Dharampur, India; S 1; D 3. Bus. Add.: 369 Kempston Road, Port Elizabeth — Phone: 45842; Res. Add.: Hayworthia Drive, N/E, Port Elizabeth — Phone: 45842. 1616 VANDAYAR, Rethinasamy: Gen- eral Dealer. b. 16th March, 1910, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. Educated: Dower School, Port Elizabeth. Son of Poonoosamy. Origin: Mauritius. Established own business — Imperial Fruiterers — 1933. Imperial Grocers came about in 1940 — the business is now owned hy an only son. Int. in the general welfare of the Indian Community and also int. in the spiritual progress of the Tamil Hindu Community of S.A.; Initiator _R80,000. Temple Hall, Malabar for S.S.B.A.; Was President: Indian Cricket Asso.; Vice President: Indian Football Association; Member: Port Elizabeth Hindu Primary School Committee; Trustee: Siva Anlayan — Rylands Estate, Cape Town. Travel: Ceylon, India, Mauritius, P-E.A., E.A. Married: Archey- cannoo Athiemoolam; S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: 126a Russel Road, Port Elizabeth; Phone: 24113; Res. Add.: 91 Russe! Road, Port Elizabeth. VELSHI, Rehmtulia Rajabali: Director of Companies. b. Lith June, 1926, Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Govt. Indian School, Kilperton College. Inst. Costs and Works Acct. - London. Son of Rajabali Velshi. Origin: Porbander, Kathiawad, India. Has travelled extensively — Europe (1946),.U.S.A. and South America, 1957, Africa, Middle East, 1957 and 1963. Has interests in Kenya. Activities: Chairman: H. H. Aga Khan S. I. I, Educational Board (1959/60); Ex. Member: Asiatic Bazaar (Pretoria) Traders Association; Member: Pretoria Indian Primary Sthoo!l Educational Committee (1967/69); Was Secretary: H. H. Aga Khans Students Union London (1947/50) — Member: Transvaal Indian Youth Congress; Secretary: Pretoria Branch: T.I.Y. Congress (1951/53); Rec.: Travel, Swimming; Married: Shrine, daughter of Noor Mohamed Madhavjee of Pretoria; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: 150 Mogul St., Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 23980; Res. Add.:151 Mogul! Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: 26270. \GI¢ VENGETSAMY, Rajagopaul: Farmer. b. 8th August, 1922, New Guelderland, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School. Son of Vengetsamy of New Guelderiand, Natal. Farming in the Glendale area of the North Coast. Activities: Vice President: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Vice Chairman: Glendale Indian Mill Group Board (non-racial). One of its kind in the country. Chair- mn: Waterbosch Indian School Society. Is a keen and deen ated worker in all sd cational, communal and social Sp ’ Vailliamma Moonsamy of New Guelder- fand: S$ 1,. us. Add.: c/o Glenmill, Private Bag Stan- o Res. Add.: Glendale, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The V. R. Varma Family of Port Elizabeth , IS \4 \ RANCHODIJEE, Govindjee Varma arrived in this country in 1907 and settled in Port Elizabeth. He estab. his first business in Parliament Street in 1921 after a number of years as a Cobbler. He was a leading Member of the Gujarati community and his knowledge in the religious field filled a gap in the spiritual needs of the people. He was a former President and Founder of the Port Elizabeth Mochi Mandal and the Hindu Seva Samaj. He also founded the S.A. Kshatriya Maha Sabha and the Mahila Mandal of Port Elizabeth. In the political field, he was the Assistant Secretary of the Cape Indian Congress, formerly the Cape British Indian Council. He was born in Balsar, India, in 1889. 325 {G20 VARMA, Vrajlai Ranchodjee: Cobbler. b. 21st October, 1921, Port Elizabeth. Eldest son of R.G. Varma, Educated: Weis Primary, Port Elizabeth. Was associated with family business — Varma & Sons, from 1933. Established own busi- ness, 1951 under the same name. Public activities: Former Secretary and Member: Aryan Sports Club; Member: Kshatriya Mandal; Sec.: Hindu Seva Samaj (1964/71); Member: Yuvac Mandal; Member: Port Elizabeth Indian Civic Asso.; Travel: India, East Africa and P.E.A. Married: Jashoda D. Kalwada; S$ 4; D I. Bus. Add.: 6 Lotus Buildings Arcade, Cottrel Street, Port Elizabeth, Phone: 41533; Res. Add.: 21 Solomon Road, N.E., Port Elizabeth. le 3 VARMA, Jashoda V.: Housewife. b. Kalvada, India. Educated: Ah- medabad — Dayanand Ashram. EDI RFA Nef ges ren mec>E HEE LS Se Nema ns COP RRR nap wean mac LCS ERY be mt Lied w hd mw bed bed id % mm % The Velayuden Family of Illovo E333 3 $5 3-3 $f LOE IRE OE JOCIRE AEX DOE OE XE HOE EB I HOE BK HL HE Hk DL HE HEH BO HOE HB I ERE HEHEHE HOE EEE ESE BIE EIA SOE EB I BOE MB IE HRB I HH IH HD HS . VELAYUDEN, Arumogam: Sch- : ool Teacher. b. Hlovo. Educated: j Illovo (First J.C. Student and } Matriculant). Fifth son of K. Velayuden. Joined Teaching Pro- fession, 1961. Public spirited. Sec.: Jlovo Indian Welfare Committee; Member: [.C.W.S. (Illovo Branch); President: Illovo Ex-scholars” Club; Vice President and Past Secretary: Mid. $/C F.A.; Manager of Leeds F.C.; Secretary: Illovo sf Bursary Committee — Scoutfgmaster: Illovo Troop; Ind. Rep.: Rotary Club (‘Toti Branch); Member: Ilovo Social . Club; Chairman and Sportsmaster: Illovo School. Secretary of S.A.IT.A. Association (Isipingo Branch); Ulovo Scioul Educational Committee; Mari. !: Rangani-'= © Mo **év- vender. Res. Add.: Illovo, Natal — Pho. \ALLOVO School) Amanzimtoti. i lea 2 K. VELAYUDEN, one of the few Indian immigrants with a com- mand of the English language, arrived in this country in 1905. He was also well versed in Telegu, Malayalum and Tamil. He was attached to the Iffovo Sugar Es- —s tate and served the Company for es over fifty years. Public spirited, he ( ] served his community well and it was due to his untiring efforts that Vv the present school was established in 1951. Deeply religious, he was a President and Foundation Mem- ber of the Illovo Temple. He was also a Member of the Soobramanian Temple at Isipingo and a disciple of Shri Paramahamsa Sachidananda Yogesswarar of Banglore, India. He was also a keen Sportsman in his early days and captained the first Soccer Team to be formed at Illovo. He died in 1963. He was born in Malayalum, India, in 1894. lo22

---

## Page 18

we ao HHI ESS DRO artr. Aypady -wengame arguRImEE \e24 FRE IEE HE NE HE IE HE ME EE The Vassan family began its early days in this country in 1896 when Parshotam Vassan arrived in Durban and it was here that the family established itself in a shoe repair field from which it eventually branched out into the foot- wear field as Vassan’s. Much later the family was again to make its mark in the manufacturing field as Gold Filled Leather Works. Parshotam Vassan was born in Astagam, Navsari, India, in 1866, about the time when the first six years in this country. Some fourteen years after his arrival, he established his first business as Vassan’s Shoe Store, a name still carried on by the family. He kept close contact with the country of his birth and made numerous trips to India over the years. During his stay in this country, he took a keen interest in the affairs of the community. In 1942 he left for India for the last time where he died at the age of eighty nine in 1955. \@ 2G VASSAN, Khandoo Parshotam: Director of Companies. b. 27th June, 1918, India. Educated: Navsari, India and South Africa. Son of Parshotam Vassan. Arrived in South Africa in 1933. Joined family business, Vassan’s Shoe Store, at an early age. Activities: Secretary: Hittechoo Mandal for over eight years. Re-elected, 1970. Is a Trustee: South African Kshat- riya Mandal and Committee Mem.: and Trustee: Surat Hindoo Asso- ciation, Also Chairman: Hittechoo ™ Mandal. Established Gold Filled Leather Works, 1960. First Indian Shoe Factory owned and run by Indians in Dur- ban. Married; S 3; D 3. Bus. Add.: 158a Grey Street, Durban — Phone: 29649; Res. Add.: 104 North Street, Durban — Phone: 63031. |67& MANI, K. P. Vassan: Daughter of M. J. Jivan of Ugat, India. Born: _* Ugat, District Navsari, India. ; Mt Wii Arrived in South Africa, 1937. Vi: eu. Jes, Wife of K. P. Vassan. The K. P. Vassan Family of Durban a % ™ m *% mt m mt E.3 * VASSAN, Chandrakant K. P.: Director; b. 1st May, 1943, Dbn.. Edu.: Kathiawad High School — Durban. Eldest son of K. P. Vassan of Durban. Is a Director: Vassan’s Shoe Store and Gold Filled Leath- er Works (Pty.) Ltd.; Sports: Soccer and Table Tennis; Married: Champavanti, daughter of Utham Chavda of Cape Town; S 1; D 1. jeo2) VASSAN, Surendralal K. P.: b. 23rd November, 1944. Edu.: Surat Hindoo School and M. L. Sultan Technical College. Director of Vassan’s Shoe Store and Gold Filled Leather Works, Durbar Interests: Literature, Soccer a. Table Tennis; Married: Nirmala, daughter of Lalloo Gopal <f Cape Town. ; le 24 VASSAN, Pravinlat b. 7th July, 194€. Surat Hindoo Schoo! Sultan Technical’. 1” of Vassan’s Shoe Store ans Filled Leather Works. Is Managiny tne Retail Section — Vassan’s Shoe Store. Treasurer: Navuk Mandal, Durban. Keen on Cricket and Soccer. Married: Premilla, daughter of Karson Ramiee of Durban. The A. Vengan Family of Isipingo The first of the well-known family to arrive in this country was M. C. Appadu who settled here in 1908 in the Um- zinto area and was attached to the Crookes I‘state. On board the s.s. Umfuli, he met and married a young girl who was on her way to this country. Appama was a member of an Upper Andhra family. Some years later, they moved to Clairwood where they eventually settled and established their first business on what was then known as The Old South Coast Road. M. C. Appadu was born at Kodisa, Vizagapatam, India, in 1884. 24th September, 1925, Clairwood. Educated: St. Michaels (Rossburgh) and Sastri College (Technical Division); But- cher and Retailer. Well-known Sports Administrator. Public activities: Secretary: S. C. District Indian Football Asso., (1944/50); Also Vice President and President: 1951/58. Hon. L/President, Trustee and Treasurer: S. C. Sports Trust; Councillor: N.IF.A. — S.C.L.F.A. Councillor: S.N.LF.A. (1947/57); President: N.F.A. (1960/61); Exec. Member: S.A.L.F.A.; Treasurer: S. C. Indian Sports Trust; Committee Member: Stri Siva Subramanier Temple, Clair- wood; Patron: Subramanian Temple, Isipingo; Vice Presi- dent: Isipingo Rail Rate-payers Association; Hon. Aud.: Gokul State Aided School; Chairman: Isipingo Beach Club; Appointed alternate Member: Isipingo Rail L.A.C. (1966/ 1967); Ex. official: Tennis and Debating Society (1946/ 1948). Established Royal Trading and Coastal Fruiterers, 1957. A. Vengan & Co., 1959. Also Shopping Centre at {sipingo, 1963. Widely travelled. Married: Neelamma C. Naidoo; § 5; D3. Bus. Add.: 11 Samsunder Road, Isipingo Rail, Natal — Phone: 91484; Res. Add.: 11 Samsunder Road, Isiping o Rail — Phone: 91287. G3) VENKETROYALU, Neelamma: Housewife. b. Umko- maas, Natal. Educated: Umkomaas. Daughter of Chinniah Naidoo of Umkomaas. Director — Vengan’s Butchery and subsidiaries. 1622 VIJAYAN, Veerabudra (V. V. Abboiyer): Teacher; b. 9th September, 1919, Newcastle, Natal. Educated: St. Oswalds, Sastri College. Son of C. V. Aboo. Origin: Arcot, India. Toined teaching profession, 1948 — Tigers Kloof School. Transfer | Lennoxton, 1949. Activities: Del.: S.A.LT-.S.; roi :du Mariamman Temple; Vice President: New Castle Law’ Association; Was Treasurer: N. N. Primary Schools Sports Association; H.L.V.P.: N.LF.C.5 Vice Prosident: S. Oaks Club; Elected to L.A.C. Newcastle. sports: Billiards Cricket, Tennis, Soccer and keen Angler. . warmah, daughter of P. Naidoo of Ladysmith; ie Res. Add.: 22 Jenkins Street, Newcastle e125. Fis ‘ge: Business Consultant. b. 15th August, ,.,xavsari, District Surat, India. Educated: Doornfon- ut Govt. School, Johannesburg High School. Son of “Vithal Naran. Origin: Navsari, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1930. Began as Public Bookkeeper, 1954 — Vithal’s Commercial Services. Also Travel and Insurance Agent. Qualified: Million Dollar Round Table (1965/69). Attended Million Dollar Round Table Conference. Acts.: Member and Hon. Auditor: Wits I. C. Union; Member: and Auditor: Hinds Football Club and Bharat Cricket Club, Johannesburg Rajput Mandal; South Africa — Rhodesia Rajput Mandal; Transvaal Rajput Mandal; Rec.: Soccer (Hinds Football Club; Cricket (Bharat Cricket Club); Married: Kasiben, daughter of Harkison Laxman of Bombay, India; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. 310 Commissioner House, 50 Commissioner Street, Johan- nesburg — Phone: 8344269; Res. Add.: lla — 20th St., Viededorp, Johannesburg — Phone: 356871. 1634 VALJEE, Hirjee: b: Thoyana, Kathiawad, India. Arrived in S.A. i 1894. Settled in Durban. Moved to Ladysmith & estab. Ist jewellery bus. Was in the Transvaal (1905) for a short period before return- ing to India in 1906. Returned to S.A. the same year and settled permanently in Ladysmith. Was Founder & Pres., S.D.S. Lady - smith. Trustee: Shree Geermara SoniGratee Heep Vardhak Mandal Porbandar. Also donated generous- ly to its establishment. Family Add: Murchison St., Ladysmith, Natal.

---

## Page 19

328 jo2s WADEE, Mohamed Ebrahim: Businessman, b, 6th November, 1906, Lachpore District, India. Educated: Avenue Road, Indian School and Bree Street Govt. Ind. School. Son of Ebrahim Moham- med Wadeg, Origin: Lachpore, India. Attived in South Africa, Ms 1915. Joined family business — I. M. Waite of De La Rey St., > 2 1921. Opened own business Wadee’s Wholesale, 1948. Acts.: } Past Chairman: Talimul-Islam Mosque amd Madressa Trust — Vrededorp; Was Secretary: Lach- pore Mosque and Madressa Trust. India; Member: C.I.T. Transvaal; Travel: India, U.K., Europe, Canada and U.S., Haj: 1944 and 1966. Married; S 13} 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 61189, S0b Commissioner Styeer, Johannesburg Phone: 8381940; Res. Add.: 17-1 sot. V “di Johannesburg Phone: 352812. ay Sieaat ee HN ae \e3G WAGLAY, Ismail Amien: b. 31st May, 1916. Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: St. Phillips, Trafalgar Nigh, Son of Amien Wa- glay. Origin: Ratnagiri, India. Was previously in retail trade — Waglay Agencies ~ 1939. Established own Auctioneering business, 1948 as Waglay Auctioneers — one of few in the Republic and the first in the Cape Province. Founder of Rylands Civic Association. Also the Police Reservists and Boy ee the area. Activities: Ist Ist Sergeant of Rylands Police Ret eee Rylands Boys Scouts Parent Committee; Trustee: Salt River Muslim Educational Commit tee: Rec.: Soccer, Urdu Classical and English Marathu Literature. Married: Noor ahan, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Perrjus of Cape Town; § 3; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box !1, Athlone, Cape - Phone: 591282, Res. Add.: “Santosh” 7 Carmella Street, Co Xylands Estate — Phone: 691282 Athlone, CP. -— 139 KATHRADa, Amod Suleman Chota”: Born 1896, Kathor, District Surat, India. Educated: Kathor ang South Africa. Estab- lished Wholesale business in 1914 at Field Street and in 1927 moved to Queen Street. Took a keen iMterest IM al] Religious, Cultural, Educational and Social activities. Was 4 M€mber of Ozone Club; Married; S 6: D 4. Died: 1950. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA Hagligh WHO'S WHO GP ‘dateae M.E. (David). O.: Busi- nessman. b. 10th August, 1931, Standerton, Transvaal. Educated: Standerton Indian and Coloured i School. Fifth son of Ebrahim Os- —_ = man Wazar. Origin: Bhanvad, In- ‘ J dia. Joined family concern — E. Osman & Sons, 1946. The firm took on the name of Wazar Bros. in 1956. Activitics: Standing, Chairman: Standerton Indian Republican Festival Committee; sone e/L.P.: Ace Tennis Club; Patrou. angers Sporting Club; L/ ; Patron: Laste’n Transvaal Football Union, L/P: Standerton Indian Social Club; Past Chairman: Eastern Educational Trust; Chairman: Standerton Educa- tional Committee; Member: Standerton School Fund Committee. Appointed C.O. Standerton District, 1964. Appointed Chairman: Standerton Indian Consultative Committee (1967); Exec. Member: Transvaal Memon Association; Member: Memon Welfare Society (Bombay). Ree.: Tennis, Literature and Travel. Married: Amina, daughter of Gani Osman (former Standerton) of Durban; S 1; D3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 221 and 42 Piet Retief St., Standerton — Phone: 247/334; Res. Add.: 25 Van Coller =~ Street -- Standerton — Phone: 1298. Io37I WADI, Essop Suleman: Businessman. b. 10th September, 1933, Koster, Transvaal. Educated: Koster Indian School Bree Street Indian School. Son of Suleman Wadi. Ori- gin: Lachpore, India. First entered business scene — family concern of Rooj Winkel, 1948. Moved to new area, 1962 and estab lished Wadi’s Public Bazaar the same year. Director of W.P.B.K.I. Co., W.I. Co. and S. Wadi & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. Keen on all local activities. One of leading supermarkets in the area. Also general merchandise. Acts.: Patron: Koster Sporting Club; Past Chairman: Koster Muslim Institute; Rec.: Tennis. Married: Julcika, daughter of Ahmed Asvat of Coligy; S 1;D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 100, Koster ~ Phone: 100; Res. Add.: Koster, “Cedrela” Phone: 100. |\6suo MAHOMED, G.H.N.: Director of Companies. b. 9th October, 1931. Educated: Greyville and Sastri College. Son of Noor Mahomed Moosa. Entered business scene — 1947. Director: Moosa Bros., 1961. Also Director: Trafalgar Enterprises, Enemsons (Pty.) Ltd., Lancia Distributors and numerous subsidiary companies of the Moosa Group. Trustee: Moosa Fakir Family Trust. Widely travelled. Married: Fathima Haffejee of Port Shepstone; S 2; D 3. Res. Add.: 23 Daintree Avenue, Asherville, Phone: 888085; Bus. Add.: Oriental] Bazaar, C/r’s Albert/ Commercial Streets, Durban - Phone: 2?109. — THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Imre} YUSUF, Ahmed Mohammed: School Teacher and Vice Principal. b. 27th May, 1917, Fairbreeze, Maidstonc, Natal. Edu.: Fairbreeze Indian School and Sastri College. Graduate B.A. (External) 2nd yr. Son of Mohammed Yusuf of Fair- breeze, Maidstone, Natal. Origin: U.LP., India. Is attached to Victoria Primary State Indian School for the last eight years. Twenty three years of service at Fairbreeze and Victoria Schools. Takes a keen interest in all Educational, Social and Communal Matters. Acts.: Secretary: Fairbreeze Madressa; Trustee: Tongaat Muslim Society and Anjuman Islam — Tongaat; Patron: Fairbreeze Cricket Club; Member: Tongaat Fairbreeze (Secretary) Ratepayers Association; Member: Maidstone Indian Mill Group. Was an Islam Teacher at Local Madressa for seven years. Now Dep. Principal: Tongaat State Aided Primary School. Rec.: Angling and Literature. Married: Shireen, eldest daughter of Late A. Khan of Overport; S 3; D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 49, Tongaat, Natal Phone: 170 Res. Add.: Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Natal. ez YUSUF, Mohamed Idris: School Principal. b. 9th August, 1915, Durban, Natal. Fourth son of Fakir Yusuf. Educated: Ladysmith and Sastri College, Durban. Qualified as Teacher in 1935. Joined te- aching profession in 1936 and appointed to Bulawayo Govt. Ind. School. Allied himself to the Sports activities of Bulawayo. Was Secretary of the Indian Sports Union and Captain of the Bula- wayo Inter-District XI’s, Soccer, Cricket. Also fine Tennis Player. Holder of S.A. record, 412 n.o. in a single innings. Magnificient Footballer. Rep. S.A. against 329 the All-India tourists in 1934 and played for Natal, Dur- ban and Inter-town on numerous occasions. Rep. Durban and Natal at Cricket and Tennis. Was organiser of the Sastri College Tours to the Transvaal, Cricket and Tennis in 1933 and 1934. Rep. S.A. Ind. XI vs Transvaal Euro- pean XI (1944). Victor Ludorum, Sastri College, 1933/ 34/35; Now School Principal in Durban. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Rec.: Angling. Married; D 5. 1o¢3 YUSUF, Dawood: Manufacturers Representative. b. 16th December, 1925, Durban, Natal. Edu.: St. Aidans College and Sastri College - Son of Yusuf Ismail of Durban and Bengal, India. Representative of leading South African Produce Merchants and Manufactuerers Established 1942 — trade name: Traders Service Agency. Sole Agents and Representatives for: Levy -— Lirsh Malt Industries (Pty.) Ltd.; Potchefstroom, E.S. & A. Robinson (Pty.) Ltd., Cape _ Town; “Viking” (Paper Bags) — Snoek Enterprises, Walvis Bay; Jacob Frankel (Pty.) Ltd. (Johannesburg Dry Produce), Grain & Seeds — Beans etc. (Pty:) Ltd. — Bethlem (Split Peas etc.). Orange Kooperasie Beperk (Lentrils and B.E. Peas) Uppington, C.P. S. Wenis- tein & Co. (Tastic Rice). Other Activities: Chairman: Springfield Welfare Society; Also holds various posts in . Religious, Social and Charitable Organisations. Was a Club Cricketer. Takes active interest in Angling and Tennis; Rec.: Travel and Debating. Married; S 2. Bus. Add.: 29-32 Valbro Chambers, 115 Victoria Street — Phone: 27324, 23218, 311965, 311695; Telex: 6-7445 — D. N. Durban. 4 Add.: 84 Sparks Road, Overport, Durban — Phone: °86706. r An outstanding work of reference containing biographies and other information of leading figures-in South Africa who are concerned with the economy, business, local government, politics, art, science and research, literature, the church, law, sport, education, the forces, etc. The Southern Africa '“* Indian Who’s Who In the Biographic Section ... Each entry supplies information on origin ,education, career, achievements — in fact everything about an individual which has made him a prominent member of society

---

## Page 20

330 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Rajab Family MAHOMED RAJAB (B.Com.) ABDUL MAJID RAJAB (B.A.) Eldest son of R. Rajab Second son of R. Rajab Director of Companies Managing Director les oe AZIZ RAJAB Third son of R. Rajab Director of Companies OMAR RAJAB Fourth son of R. Rajab Director of Companies ios aaa loGo SULEMAN RAJAB (B.A. LL.B) Youngest son of R. Rajab Director of Companies AKBAR RAJAB Fifth son of R. Rajab Director of Companies Controlling . . . SHAH JEHAN CINEMAS (PTY.) LTD. SUMMIT FURNISHERS (PTY.) LTD. SALIM DISTRIBUTORS (PTY.) LTD. BRADFORD CLOTHING MNFRS. (PTY.) LTD. RAJAB BROS. (PTY.) LTD. RAJAB HOLDINGS (PTY.) LTD. CENTURY UPHOLSTERY WORKS (f©Y.) LTD. HOUSE OF SHIRAZ (PTY.) LTD. oo0l8mUmUCODUUCOUCUCONMOUCUCUCOUCSS P.O. Box 1893 — Tels: “SHAJEHAN” — Phones: 68561/315141/315136 RAJAB CENTRE:— 85/89 VICTORIA’ STREET — DURBAN. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 33] The Rajab Family {G61 1662 AHMED RAJAB MEHMOUD RAJAB Manager B. Com. LL.B. SUMMIT FURNISHERS (PTY.) LTD. Chief Accountant Furniture Retailers & Home Furnishers Rajab Group of Companies 1663 loo & ABDUL KADER RAJAB B.Com. HASSAN RAJAB Manager Manager BRADFORD CLOTHING MNFRS. (PTY.) LTD. SALIM DISTRIBUTORS (PTY.) LTD. j Clothing Manufacturers Clothing Wholesalers ges HOOSEN RAJAB Manager CENTURY UPHOLSTERY WORKS Furniture Manufacturers

---

