# Southern Africa Indian Who's Who (1971-72)

**Book ID:** southern-africa-whos-who-1971-pt6
**Total Pages:** 24

---

## Page 1

148 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO HE TEI HE HOEHA HE HA HB EI HE IH EB HEI HEI HEH HEHE HH HEHE HN BENE HLH HE HEB HEH HEI HE HHL BE HE HEB BI BH BH HB HB HED HE I HE HEI HEH EI HE bos. $585.55 8-4 SEK MERA EK 22 Suleman [smail Kadwa arrived in South Africa in 1895. He was born in Kathor, India, two years earlier and accompanied by his parents, the family settled in Umzinto where other members of the Kad- wa’s of Kathor had already estab. themselves early before the ninety’s. The family business had been in existence for some time under the name, I. S. Kadwa. It was a partnership and A. S. and I. S. Kadwa ran the business until 1939 when the latter died during a protracted visit to India. Of the five sons of I. S. Kadwa, the eldest, S. I. Kadwa, was associated with the parent company from an early age. In 1928, he established his own business at Braemar where the family trades to this day. S. 1, Kadwa is better known for his charitable works. He donated over seventy acres to As-salaam, an institution which does missionary work amongst Africans. A man of sterling character and forthright manner, he was respected and esteemed by every section of the Indian community. His activities, in every sphere of Indian life, speak volumes. He was a Treasurer and Chairman: Umzin- to Mosque and Madressa and a Trustee and Grantee of the Braemar Indian School for many years. He died in 1962 at the age of seventy one. “134 MOHAMED, Suleman Kadwa: Businessman: b. 2nd May, 1917, at Umzinto. Educated: Umzinto Indian School. Contributed to various deserving causes. Interested in all matters affecting community; Rec.: Soccer; Married: Mariam Kadwa of Umzinto, Natal; S 2; D 1; Bus. Add.: 237 Grey Street, Durban; Phone: 65450; Res. Add.: Flat 1, 56 Ocean Terrace, Isipingo Beach; Phone: 91246 and 20829 Durban. The Kadwa Family of Braemar BEE IH EI HH BH HH HE YEH NE HEHE BHI HEHEHE HK HE ESL HE BB HEEB HE EIB HEHE HE HERE HBB HK BE EBA HOE IK KHL BH HE HH He EI HE EIR OE EE MEE EEK “3B AHMED, Suleman Kadwa: Busi- nessman; b. 6th June, 1923 at Umzinto. Educated: Braemar Govt. Indian School. Son of Late Hajee S. I. Kadwa of Kathor, India and Braemar, Umzinto. Was associated with family con- cern of S. I. Kadwa & Sons — Braemar and Kadwa Syndicate. Director: Favourite Bazaar (Port Shepstone); Favourite Super Market and Favourite Wholesale (Port Shepstone); Valleys Trading Store (Port Shepstone). Opened own business — Kadwa’s Highland Store — Port Shepstone District 1945/67. Other Activities: Trustee: As-salaam Trust; S. I. Kadwa Trust; Past Secretary and Trustee: Louisana Govt. Aided Indian School; Member: Port Shepstone (Albersville) Indian Ratepayers Association; Rec.: Travel and Hunting. Performed Haj — 1959/60 Visited Middle East, Far East, India, Burma and Ceylon. Married: Hajira, daughter of I. A. Patel of “'~geni, Dur- ban; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O, Box 222, Phone ‘11; Res. Add.: Albersville Rd., Phone: 411, Port Shepstone. —_ V3S G.H.S. Kadwa: Director of Companies; b. 8th Jute, 1928, at Umzinto, Educated: Braemar, Umzinto and Port Shepstone. Associated with family business in Brae- mar for twenty three years. Took over business in 1959 — trading as S, | Ka. a & Sons. Also does Insurance as Kadwa Syndicate. Is a Trustee of the. Umzinto Mosque and Madressa Trust; As-salaam Trust; Grantee: Braemar State Aided School. Takes a keen interest in ail Public Activities. Rec.: Angling, Literature. Married: Fathima, ‘daughter of Mohamed S. Kajée of Durban. Towed India, Pakistan and Middle East in 1962. Performed Haj the same year; S 6; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box Braemar; Phone: Braemar’4. Res. Add.: Braemar (Phone 4). = T3¢ H. S. Kadwa: Businessman. b. 1930 at Braemar, Umzinto. Educated: Braemar Govt. Aided-School. Associated with father’s business — Kadwa’s Top Store and Umhlanga Rocks Drive. Now trading at Isipingo — Kadwa’s Shop-. ping Centre. Married: Ayesha, daughter of A. Paruk of Durban. Res. Add.: Khan Road, {sipingo, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 149 “iat KAJEE, Ebrahim Ahmed: Teacher b. 30th March, 1935 at Hatting- spruit. Educated: Glencoe and Dundee High School. Son of Late E. I. Kajee of Glencoe and Vareti District, Surat, India. Dedicated Teacher and Social Worker of Glencoe. Joined teaching pro- fession in 1959 and has been attached to the Dannhauser school from that period. Taies keen interest in all matters affecting committee. Activities: Chairman: F.O.S.A. (Glencoe), Mosque and Madressa Trust; Founder: Glencoe Social Service Society; First Secretary: (1961) Northern Natal Primary Schools Sports Associa- tion. Was appointed to Local Affairs Com. — Glencoeby Adm, in Exec., 1965. Married: Firoza, daughter of Cassim Bhigijec of Newcastle; S 2; Rec.: Drama. Is a local producer and takes an active part in Amateur Dramatics. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 16, Glencoe; Res. Add.: 6 Gandhi Road, Glen- coe, Natal. “ISDS KAJEE, Essop Suleman: Director of Companies and Ins. Consultant. b. 29th May, 1929, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Indian School. Diploma in Bookkeeping and Bus. Methods. Son of H. Suleman E. Kajee of Ankrod, District Surat, India. Managing Director of N.C. Travel Agencies (Pty.) Ltd., Stan- 3 ger Hardware Supplies (Pty.) Ltd., Eskay Invests. (Pty.) Ltd., N. C. Agencies; Director: Stanger Generai Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd., rat Agents for: Apex Perm. Bldg. Soc.; Union and Natal Ins. Co.; Protea Assurance Co.; Liberty Life Asso. of Africa Ltd.: S.A. Growth Equity Fund; I.A.T.A. Au.ne and World Wide Shipping Co’s. Only Non-White I.A.1.A. recognised org. in Natal: S$. A. Railways (passenger) Durban; Travellers Facilities Chub Tours. Treasurer: Stanger Indian Rate- payers Association; Past Treasurer: Stanger Madressa aAnjumar Islam; Past Secretary: Stanger Indian Education- al Board; Member and Ex. Secretary: M. L. Sultan Tech. College Advisory Comm., Member: Durban M. L. Sultan Technical College; Past Secretary: Stanger Surtee Muslim Cony. Takes interest in all other Sucial and Comm. Matters. Sporis: Tennis, Rec.: Travel, Literature, Languages and Culture, Married: Hafez, daughter of Mrs. and the~Late Mohamed Gangat of Marburg, Port Shepstone, S 3;D 1. Bus. Add.: 33 Hulett Street, Stanger; Phone: 352 and 582. After hours 325, Res. Add.: 33 Hulett Street, Stan- gei. Phone: 325, Durban Office: Suite 5, Porbander Arcade, 242 Grey Street, Durban. aka | KAJEE, Mahomed Ahmed: Busi- nessman. b. June, 1899, Malvern, Natal. Educated: Higher Grade School. Ind. Edu. Institute. One of the foremost Indian agents in this province in South Africa. Better known as Kazi’s Agency. ‘Represented some of the best known business houses in the Republic. Was in the retail busi- ness sector from 1924 to 1928 as Malvern Bazaars. Established the frim of Kazi’s Agency in 1928. Other activities: Was “Organiser: : and Treasurer: Royal Visit Indian Reception Committee in 1947 and had the honour of being presented to the Royal Family. Was a F/Member of the N.I.O. Also held various positions in local Cultural and Social bodies and was a Trustee of the Mahammedya Mosque, a Patron of the Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, Mayville, and a supporter of numerous deserving causes in this country and overseas. Bus. Add.: 37 Albert Street, Durban. TYO KAJEE, Goolam Mohamed Ebra- him: Businessman and Town Councillor; b. 21st December, 1924, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Umdhloti Govt. Indian School. Son of Ebrahim Amod Kajee of Verulam and Kathor, District. Surat, India. Prop.: Dry Cleaners, established — Medicus Laundry & Dry Cleaners; Manager: Victoria F.M., Verulam Branch. P/Mnrg, of New Era Stores, Durban. Acts.: Past Secretary: (20 years)Verulam Madressa Trust — Koovathe Islam; Past President: Verulam Clinic Board (3 years); Chairman: F.O.S.A. (1963/68);-Secretary: Verulam Indian Centenary Trust; Verulam Indian Rate- payers Association; Vice Chairman: Various other bodies; L.C.W.S., School Board and Sports bodies. First Election Verulam Local. Affairs Comm.; Elected Member (3rd highest vote); Nominated Member, first [.T. Board in Republic. Member of Town Board ~ 1967/72: Chairman: General Purp. Comm., 1968/72. Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Rep. North Coast Inter-Dist. Cricket. Add.: 84 Wick St., Phone: 133, Verulam; Res. Add.: 28 a Wick Street, Verulam, Natal — Phone 231, Verulam, Natal.

---

## Page 2

“Mh KAJEE, Mohamed Ismail: Direc tor of Companies. b. 8th January, 1930 at Newcastle. Educated: Glencoe Indian School and Dundee High. Son of Ismail Kajee of Glencoe and Tadkeshwar, Dist. Surat, India. One of Natal’s leading younger generation of business- men. Director of various Indus- trial, Commercial and Develop- ment Companies. Better known for his connection with Coovadia’s Wholesale & Golden Gate Estate Agencies..Appointed by Adm - in - Exec. tocL*A.C., Isipingo Beach in 1966. Elected to polls same year for further period and re-elected for 1967. Chairman of Isipingo Beach L.A.C. for 1967/68; Other Activities: Member: Orient Islamic Trust; Isipingo Beach Indian Advisory Board; Isipingo Beach Civic Association; Isipingo Beach Muslim Associa- tion. Rec.: Tennis, Swimming. Was active Soccerite and Cricketer. Toured the world during 1961. European countries 1965/66; went on pilgrimage 1967. Visited Middle East and East Africa. Married: Ayesha, daughter of Ismail Mohamed Coovadia of Johannesburg; S 1; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 518; Phone: 21887, 25430, 369 and 373 Pine Street, Durban. 1 > ‘ KAJEE, Mohamed Sadek Ahmed: Director, Insurance Broker, Land and Estate Agent. b. 23rd Feb., 1940, Dannhauser, Natal. Edu.: Stanger High School. Son of Ahmed Suleman Kajee of Stanger and grandson of S. E. Kajee of Stanger and Ankrod, District Surat, India. Director: Stanger General Wholesalers. (Pty.) Ltd. Insurance Broker. Deals in Land -_ e 4 2 Rep. for International Co. since 1964. Widely travelled. Hobbies: and Estate. Outstanding Insurance _ Coin Collecting and Stamps. Rec.: Soccer. Member: Stanger Ratepayers Association; Trustee: Stanger Sunni Muslim Congregation. Married: Ayesha E. Mehtar. S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: 32 Couper Street, Phope: 36; P. O. Box 136; Res. Add.: 18 Centenary Road, Stanger, Phone: 483, Stanger, Natal. WS KALANJEE; Parbhoobhai: Busi- nessman. b. 1912, Orna, District p—" Surat, India. Educated: Orna, = India. Son of Kalanjee Hira. General Merchants and Textile : PX Specialists. Keen member of focal — Religious and Cultural bodies. Past Secretary: Boksburg Hindi Gujarati School. Ex President: Transvaal Mayavar Mandal. Travel: India, Rhodesia, Zambia, E.A., and P.E.A.; Married: Nathiben, daughter of Vallabh Ganga. S 4, D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 5065, Boksburg North. Phone: 522658. Res. Add.: 14th Avenue, Boksburg North, Transvaal. THE SOUT IEAM AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO +2 KALIAN, Harilal: Merchant Tailors; b. 27th February, 1915, Kharsad, District Surat, India. Educated: Kharsad, India. Son of Kalian Gopaul. Arrived in South Africa in 1930. Established own business in 1941 — Standard Tailors, Springs. Moved to Boksburg in 1942, trading under same name. Travel: India, Rhodesia, East Africa. Activities: Member: Transvaal Darjee Mandal. Rec.: Gujarati Litera- ture. Married: Gajarabhen, daughter of Late Parbhoo F. S 3; D 5. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box $078, Boksburg North, Phone: 521941. Res. Add.: 1013 Solanki Street, Ext. 3, Benoni, Transvaal. “Ty KALIDAS, Dhana: Businessman, b. Ist September, 1907 at Kachhiawadi, District Navsari, Surat, India. Educated: Durban Natal. Son of Kara Gosai. Arrived in South Africa in 1917 and joined family business in 1925. Traded as Kalidas & Co. in partnership with elder brother, Haribhai Kalidas. Branched out on his own in 1962. Dhana Kalidas & Sons. Travel: India, E.A., P.E.A. and the Re- public. Activities: Past Treasurer: and Member: Durban Hitechchoo Mandal; Past Council Member: South African Kshatriya Mandal; Member: Navsari Taluka Punch Society. Takes a keen interest in the Cultural, Religious and Educational spheres. Rec.: Soccer, Travel, Literature, Religious music. Married: Paliben, daughter of Athen, District Surat, India; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: 119 Victoria Street, Durban. Phone: 25776; Res. Add.: Flat 2, 92 Prince Edward Street, Durban Phone: 63149. VEC KALIKA, Baliram “Billy”: (N.T.S.C.); N.T.D.; b. 20th Jan., 1931, P. M. Burg, Natal. Edu.: E.P.S. and Woodlands High, Sastri College. Son of Kalika Isree. Origin: Kathiawad, Fathepur, U.P., India. Joined teaching prefession, 195] Mt. Partridge " dian School, Was at same school for twenty years. Cricket: First played for M.I.C.C., 1946. Rep. P. M. Burg; N. Natal and Na‘al at Soccer (1955/58). Cricket (1° 7?! 60). Rep. Natal vs Coloureus 1954/55, vs Kenyans. Capt. N. Natal vs S. Natal (1956). Soccer: Rep. N. Natal at Cane Town (1958), Sam China Touracy. Played for Mid.a: in All India Cup 1957 and ""ter-race fixtures. Fiv. side-Winners of Mehta Shits “** Hand Ag sive Opening Bat; R/.. Fast Bow’ rm All Rounder. H/Score 103; Bo Royals C.C.; Rec.: Table Tennis; wu.. + and Angling. Married: Prakashwathey, d~ N. i rbans of Tongaat; S °;D 2. Res. + Road, Raisethorpe, Pietermar tzbure, Natal THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Lm 157 Ti ea pi at ti ate csi ve ag cae HEE HE HA I IK HK BE HH EB EH HE HE HEB HE IK BOE EI BK HB BEB HEI HOCH HE HE HE HEH HEHE EH x x % x x x x x x x x x 7147 GOPALDAS, Kala, born at Bhan- vad, Saurastra, Kathiawar, India in 1897. He was joined by his elder brother Gordhandas Kala and together, the two brothers earned a modest living in Pretoria. Gord- handas died in 1915. Later in 1906, Gopaldas Kala together with his nephews, Jivandas Gordhandas and Nathalal Gordhandas, estab- lished the business of G. Kala & Company. Then followed years ! of progress and by the year 1939 the Kala family attained a sound financial standing and became known for its social and business integrity. In 1939, the business of G. Kala & Company was taken over by Dulabhjee Gopaldas and Liiadhar Gopaldas, the two sons of Gopaldas Kala., “149 LILADHAR, Gopaldas was born in Gunda, near Porbandar, India on the 11th August, 1915 and came to South Africa in 1926. During the war years and there- after, tte did much to enhance the prosperity and standing of the family business and in 1956 he established the business of Pretoria Textile Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd. At present the business is managed by his only «cn Niranjan Liladhar Kala and his wife Muktaben, who is also a Director. Liladhar Gopal- das Kala was esteemed by all who came in contact with ‘*- Je took an active part in the affairs of the Pretoria ssututl Seva Samaj and was Chairman of the body for some years. He also lead drives for funds such as the Pretoria Aid le Fund and others. Died: 1st December, 1964. The L. G. Kala Family of Pretoria HE KK HEHE HEI HEHE NE EH HEHE I HOEBBE HOE EB HOEHE BE HE BEI HL HE HEH HOEHEH IHL 3 HOEHE ROEHEH HOEHE LH HE HLH BEI BEBE HH IK OE I IK IE HK I III EE F.3 bd x x m 3 x x Fd x a THY MUKTABEN, L. G. Kala: Eldest daughter of Magarlal Jinabhai of Porbandar, India. Born: Porban- — YY dar, India. Is a Director of Pretoria | Textile Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd. and G. Kala & Sons (Pty.) Ltd. : Interests: Religiously inclined. Is ~ at present in India for furthering ‘ children’s education. Daughter, Kishori — B.Sc. — Micro Biology. Ex, Pretoria High. First of family gitls to graduate. NIRANJAN, Liladhar Gopaldag Kala: b. 11th August,.1943, at Pretoria. Educated: Matriculated at Pretoria High far Boys. Son of Liladhar Gopaldas Kala. Origin: Porbandar, India. Joined family concern 1963. Took sole charge of business in 1964-at the death of L. G. Kala. Plays Tennis. Sec.: Navyuga Mandal — a Gujarati Cultural body. Rec.: Reading, Mu- sic and other Cultural activities. Married: Kiran Manilal K. Sunder- jee; D 2. Bus. Add.: 236 Jerusalem Street, Pretoria, Phone: 27856. Res. Add.: 197 Fourth Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: 23899.

---

## Page 3

152 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HEH IL IE LIK SEI BL HEI REI HL IH IE HEI HEB BIE HSE HAHEI HHH I HE HEB HEHE HE BL HE I IE BR HEE HRB I Hk HB HH HI HE HB HI I I x The Parbhoo Kalian Family of Johannesburg “1S } WEEE IL I IRE HE HE EERE BENE HEE I BH HEME BB BUBB HEHE BBB HE SOE BH HOEHEH HB BOE HE HOEHEB BA BHI HE HLH BH HEH DI I HI BEI SETI Bo3-3-$.2-3-2-2-$-2.3-$-$-4 PEK Little is known of the Parbhoo family of the pioneering years. Kalian Naran arrived in this country at the turn of the century followed by his son Parbhoo who settled in Johannesburg in 1915 and 1919, both father and son were running a tailoring business in De La Rey Street, Vrede- dorp. Not long after this they established another tailoring business in Market Street. This however did not last long and was closed in favour of the Vrededorp business. It was about this time that the Roodepoort business was established. Born in India in 1884, Parbhoo Kalian died in 1926 at the age of forty two. Interested in all local activities, he was a member of the Darjee (Transvaal) Mandal. 71S3 I a RANCHOD, Parbhoo Kalian: eo as S ae iain i ilor; [ Johannesburg. Educated: Padgha, lian: Merchant Tailor; b. 1904, 1924 at Vrededorp, e ye ae econ aes a Johannesburg Govt. Aided District Navsari, eit mane ree Biipatires ‘ i ied: bhoo Kalian (Estab. 1919). Director: Sellwell Tra 0. School. Eldest son of Parbhoo Kalian. Died: 16th Feb., ; ae ene egy ge: si two. Joined family concern 1920, Travel: India, | ast Africa, ae , and aioe eile ene Sellwell Trading Co., 1942. P.E.A. Activities: Secretary: Hindu Crematorium Com.; ivities: Trustee; Past/Secretary: Transvaal Hindu Committee Member: Transvaal Hindu Se-a Sait Past ribs : ate peat peter fc Crematorium Com- Secretary and Member: Transvaal Dasjee eee, oF fins mittee; Com. Member: Gandhi Bharat Vidyalaya School; and ppiretarye: Eaton Bharat Singh Ce hay ‘ oi 3 Past Chairman: Transvaal Darjee Mandal; Member: Trans- publication of Prakash DSM EDEP EE) ae ve 4 ies vaal Bespoke Tailoring Industry; Was instrumental in the cal Music (Indian), Literature. Married: Pankorbeh, daug i i atori i i f Durban; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: iiding of the Gandhi Hall and Hindu Crematorium in ter of Motiram Daya o :$3;D_ ! i a with others. Was a keen Sportsman. Survived $3b De La Rey Street, Vrededorp; Phone: 352814; ies. by widow; S 1;D 2 Add.: 14 - 11th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Phone: as it 352814. ; - PARMANAND, Nursie: Businessman. Bus. Add.: $3b Beatrice Street, Durban — Stvie Centre. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO‘’S WHO 153 The Kalidas Family asy Of Litchenburg JAMNADAS, Kantilal: Businessman; b. 31st October, 1931, Langlaagte, Johannesburg. Educated: Gandhi Hall and Langlaagte ,Col. School. Eldest son of Jamnadas Kalidas of Magdilla, India. Merchant Tailor — Established Harrie’s Tailors, 1955. Town’s only tailoring establishment. Activities: Member: Transvaal Darjee Mandal. Travel — India and African Countries. Married: Kanchanben Dalpat Naran; S 2;D 2; Bus. Add.:. P. O. Box 342, Lichtenburg, Res. Add.: 39b Long Street, Lichtenburg — Phone: 695, 1s GANGARAM (Raman) Jamnadas: b. 7th January, 1938, Johannesburg, Transvaal. Second son of J. Kalidas. Partner: Haries Tailors. Entered business — 1956. Edu.: Roodepoort Indian School and Magdilla, India. Married: Manubeh Ganda Daya. $ 1; D 1. Interests: Photography, Music, Literature, Travel: India — 1945. The Kalidas family of Lichtenburg first settled in Lourenco Marques and it was there that Kalidas Ranchod established a Tailoring business which became one of the leading- Tailoring houses in the East African Territory. The family had previously been resident in Ethopia and it was in 1914 that Kalidas Ranchod settled in South Africa in Johannesburg where he opened a tailoring business. Jam- nadas Kalidas was the second son of Kalidas Ranchod and he arrived in South Africa in 1921 and first settled in Pretoria. In 1930 he established his own business at Langlaagte as J. Kalidas. It was the only Indian tailoring business in the the area. He took a keen interest in all matters affecting his community and was a Committee member of the South African Darji Mandal for many years and was also connect- ed with the Transvaal Indian Congress. He was born in Magdilla, District Surat, India in 1910. He died in May, 1945 in his home town after a short illness. SSS ISG KAMDAR, A.C.: Businéssman. b. 28th August, 1924, Durban, Natal. Educated: Greyville School and M. L. Sultan Technical College. Diploma Bookkeeping and Commerce. Son of Hajee N. M. Kamdar of Durban and Bhanwar, Khathiawad, India. Began retail grocery and spice business in 1954. Specialists in spices. Director: Casnoor Investments. Interested in all Sports and Social activities. Active Table Tennis Player, Muslim Institute, Rec.: Anglin... Married: Mariam, daughter of S. A. L. Osman of Richmond, Natal. S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: 12 a Cross Street, Durban; Phone: 67961. Res, Add.: 91 Albert Street, Durban — Phone: 22277, ISB KALLAN, Masthan: b. 6th June, 1902, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School. First licensed {ndian Plumber in Natal. M. Kailan, Stanger. Contractors since 1954. Manufacturer of C. Tanks for over forty seven years. Began with fathers business, first quarter of century. Now run Jointly with sons, Tawfique and Abdul Hamid Kallan. Mr. Kallan was a Trustee of the Islamic Mad- tessa, Stanger for fifteen years before the change over to Anju- man. Islam. Rec.: Soccer and Cri- ket. Rep. and captained N. C, Soccer XI’s; Fishing and Boxing. Married: S 2;D 5. Add.: P. O. Box 192; Phone 510, Stanger; Res. Add.: King George Road, Stanger. oer KALLIDEEN, Jagdeo: Businessman; b. 28th March, 1928, Ladysmith, Natal. Educated: Ladysmith Govt. School. Son of Debi Kallideen. Origin: Lucknow, India. First entered business scene, 1956 — Athlone Cafp. Established J.K. Stores (1967) and Jackie’s Restaurant (1969). Active in all local Social‘and Cultural organisations. Other Acts.: Was instrumental. in establishing Hindi School in Lady- smith at the H.Y.S.; Past Secretary: L’s C.C., Schools F.C. and Vice President: Hindi. Yuvak Sabha; Past Committee Member: S.D.S.; Member: Ladysmith Indian Ratepayers Association; Travel: P.E.A., Swaziland, the Republic. Hobby: Angling; Married: Chandrapathie, daughter of the Late Mr. & Mrs. Bedasie of Newcastle. Bus. Add.: 131 Forbes Street, Ladysmith, Phone: =? Res, Add 56 Quality. Street, Ladysmith; Phone: 1405. ; $7] KANJEE, Bhagoo: Businessman. Diploma-Tailors & Cutters — London. b. 14th March, 1939. Boksburg, Transvaal. Educated: Matvad, Boksburg and Benoni High. Son of Kanjee Hira. Entered business scene as apprentice tailor in 1955. Established own business in 1966 as Kanjee’s Tailors. Acts.: Chairman: Atlantis Soccer Festival Committee. Interested in all local Sports and Social activities. Travel: ERs. India, Rhodesia, P.E.A., Swaziland aah ‘ and Mauritius. Married: Prabha- vathi, daughter of Rama Ravjee; S 2; Bus. Add.: P: O, Box 1095, Benoni, Transvaal — Phone: 546231.

---

## Page 4

THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 155 154 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO BREMEN HE BEE IEE ROR RIE HEBER H ERLE BER BMI EB BIE I, THE A.M. KALLA FAMILY Continued ... z ‘ & Pd x The : i , ° : ee 764 4 F | ‘ = Aboo Moosa Kalla Family : Tile. ean : % b. 29th July, 1948. Educated: asain x Pretoria High School. Sixth son of NIZAM, Aboo Kalla: b. 4th July, OT TTEET TCT TTT TT TTC CT TERE TEC ET CCCT TOTO ETT TCT CLOT TCO COTE TTT T ee ge etieriac wd bdatioh, 7160 HAJEE, Aboobaker Moosa Kalla: Businessman. b. 14th April, 1914, Ranavav, Kathiawad, India. Edu.: Self-taught. Son of Moosa Moha- med Kalla. Origin: Ranavav, Kathiawad, india. Is one of leading Islamic writers. Thoughtful artic- les on religious matters. Rec.: Islamic Literature and Writing Prop.: Well-known Cycling House and Soft goods business in Boom Street, Pretoria. Also Manufactur- er of Toiletetries and Leather goods. Married: Zuleika, daughter of Late Abdul Gani Ismail of Pretoria; S 9; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 2864, Pretoria, Phone: 28248; Res. Add.: 237 - 17th Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. 3462 EBRAHIM, Aboo Kalla: b. 19th October, 1938. Educated: Pretoria High School. Eldest son of A.M. Kalla. In business with parent firm A. M. Kalla & Sons subsidiaries. Married: Zubeida, daughter of Hajee Makki, Villeria, Pretoria; $1;D1. T64¢ ABDOOL, Sathar Aboo Kalla: b. 4th July, 1940. Edue#ted: Pretoria High School. Second son of Aboo Kalla of Pretoria. In business with parent firm of A. M. Kalla & Sons subsidiaries. Married: Kairoon, daughter of Hajee M. Ayob (Nisha). S 2;D 1. we ANWER, Aboo Kalla: Director. b. 22nd January, 1942. Educated: Pretoria High School. Third son of Aboo Kalla of Pretoria. In business with parent firm of A. M. Kalla & Sons subsidiaries. 463 SIKANDER, Aboo Kalla: Director b. 21st December, 1943. Edu.: Pretoria High School. Fourth sen of Aboo Kalla. In business with parent firm of A. M. Kalla & Sons subsidiaries. Married: Zubeida - daughter of Hajee A. Cassim of Johannesburg; S 1. 16S ISMAIL, ABOO Kalla: Director. b. 9th September, 1945, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High School. Fifth son of A. M. Kalla. cn busi- ness with parent firm of A. M. Kalla & Sons subsidiaries. Married : Rabia, Gaughter of Hajee Noor Mohamed of Pretoria; S 1. of Aboo Kalla. In business with parent firm of A. M. Kalla & subsidiaries. 1HWsS AKBAR, Aboo Kalla: b. 9th May, 1947. Furthering education. 169 ZOHRA, Aboo Kalla: b. 17th October, 1950, Married : Ebrahim Omar tsmail of Laudium, Pretoria; S$ 1. —T “10 HAROON, Aboo Kalla: b. 15th July. 1957. Furthering Education. The “" Kandhai Bhugath Family of Mount Edgecombe 71) KANDHAI, Bhugath was born in 1887 in a village near Lucknow which went by the rather noble name of Nawab- gunj in the United Provinces. He came of farming stock, steeped in the traditions of his people, and arrived in South Africa on board the S. S. “Pongola” in 1910 and was amongst the last arrivals of indentured Indians into this country. He joined the Sykes Estate at Rietriver which was not far from the farm which he eventually bought in 1928. Shortly after, he n:oved to Inanda where he dealt in cattle and farm produce on leased land. He prospered and after cight years, he purchased a farm at Rietriver, not far from Ottawa. This was the beginning of cane farming activities by the Kandhai family in the area which is traced back to 1928. There were few Indian families in Rictriver at the time and the Kandhais had to contend with floods and the usual labour problems but on the whole, they worked and tilled the land as a family unit. The gldest of the two 30:3 of Kandhai, Manilall, and the second, Ram- ‘allie, now run the family farm with Kandhaias the retired head of the family, still very much active and his late | i t eighties. He was educated in Hindi at Bilhara Madressa in Nawabgung and has few peers in his country in that language. He taught many of the last few generations in Hindi in the academic and religious fields. A. strict vegetarian, he is well versed in the Hindu religion. A keen Musician and fine Singer. aloh2: MANILAL, Kandhai: b. 1926. Farmed. Joined father in farming from the age of seventeen, Is now Manager of the family estate at Rietriver. Educated: Ramgobins Govt, Aided School Inanda. Married: Suminthra Mahabcer; 5S 4; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 7, Mt. Edgecombe. Res. Add.: Rietriver, District Verulam, Natal. Pa lai eae RAMBALLIE, Kandhai: b. 1932. Farmer. Part of the family set-up in farming. Overseer of labour on the farm. Married: Seoranic Balkarain; S 1: D 4. Res. Add.: Rietriver, District Verulam, Natal.

---

## Page 5

156 SSS F-S-5-2°2-3-S- 2-94 R THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO BRE KE RK HEE KE REE HEHE HEHE HEH BOE BH HHL HEH HL HH EE BI BBB HHH HLH NH HE HE NE HEI BE HH HE HH HELI IE HH HH HH HB BE SDD The Kanhai Family of Pietermaritzburg SOE I SE 71 KANHAI, Debi: b. 1870, Banna Narainpur, U.P., City: ai Cawnpore, India. Kanhai Debi arrived in South Africa in IWS 1905 and settled in the Zwartkop area near Pietermaritz- burg. Contracted to a local farmer he served as an overseer for a number of years. He moved to Elandskop some years : later where he gained his first experience as a Brick- g Manufacturer. It was another five years before he {eft Ye nh Elandskop to break out on his own. The experience gained . there served him well in his new employment which was “= with the firm of Armitage, a manufacturer of wire-cut bricks in Pictermaritzburg. This was in the twenty’s. Kanhai Debi served his last employer, the Pietermaritzburg Cold Storage Company, who evertually pensioned him off in 1954 he was then over cighty. He was a deeply religious man and was a highly respected member of the Hindi community. He was a keen and active supporter of the Vedi Vidya Pracharack Sabha in Pentrich. He died on the 2ist February, 1964, at the age of ninety four. ain JAYACHUNDAR, Kanhai: b. 4th April, 1931 at Pentrich, P. M. Burg. Educated: E.P.S. School and Woodlands High. Son of Kanhai Debi of Cawnpore, U.P., India and Pietermaritzburg. Began as Tennis Court Construction Contractor in 1950. Joined building industry in 1953. Building Contractor —1963, Kanhai Bros. One of Jeading Indian Builders in the Midlands. Also Director: Builders & Builders Suppliers. Public spirited. Acts.: Chairman: New Holme LC.W.S.; Committee Member: LC.W.S., P. M. Burg; Treasurer: Mahatma Gandhi Commemoration Community; Vice Chairman: T.P.A, School Education Committee; Patron: Deepavali Cheer Society, Northdale Sports Club; Life Trustee and Committee Member: Northdale Sanathan Sabha: Vice President: New Holme Indian Rate Payers Association. Has contributed outstandingly in cash, kind and labour towards several communal! projects — Bethany Temple (New Holmes), Woodlands Schoo} Building Funds, Divine Life Society (Northdale branch), T.P.Ap School, Northdale S$. D. S., Shri Vishnu Temple. Donated, to Indian community of Pietermaritzburg and District in memory of his late brother. Rec.: Music, Literature, Angling. Married: Phulmathie, daughter of B. Ramnarian of Eston. Mid-[flovo: S [; D 4. Bus. Add.: 552 Greytown Road, Raiscthorpe, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Phone: 25109. Res. Add.: 74 Cyprus Way, New Holmes, P. M. Burg, Nth. an RAMPERSADH, Kanhai: Builder. b. 1913, at Pentrich, P. M. Burg. Educated: E.P.S. (P. M. Burg). Was in Tanning extract Industry. until! 1937. Joined the buiiding trade following year in 1938. Third son of Kanhai Debi, Rani- persadh was born in 1913. B& The present activities of the Kan- hai brothers was due to Ramper- sadh’s entry into this trade. There are, today, six brothers in the Co. . formed in 1958 as Kanhai Bros. It is one of the best known firms of Indian Contractors in the Capital. Activities: Vice President: $.V.D.S., Northdale, Pietermaritzburg; Committee Member and Vice President: Pietermaritzburg Indian Burial Society, Rec.: Angling. Married: Phufmathic, daughter of Mrs. and the Late Mr. S. Nirpath of Plessislaer, Pietermaritzburg; D 1; Bus. Add.: Greytown Road, Raisethorpe, Pictermaritzburg, Natal. came Building Contractor in 1942, THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 157 RE SESE RE RIE IE ER HE RH EERO ORO AO : : : The i Kanjee Ravij i anjee Ravjee Family : Ed DRE CC 9 ARH RRO HO ONE RCHEANN cor sceocioiuninil The first yes family arrived in South Africa in 1895 and fare settled at Maidstone on the Natal North Coast where he =} 1 T 13 was in the fruit and vegetable trade as a hawker for many 4 years. He was joined by his son, Kanjee Ravjee and some years later both father and son moved to Durban. Ravjee Gopal returned to India in 1922 where he died in 1923. He was born in Navsari, India, in 1883. Kanjee Ravjee had returned to India earlier where he had taken up the family trade of bricklaying and back in South Africa in 1922, he joined the building trade on the North Coast and it was as a bricklayer and builder that he made his mark here. He helped in the construction of many of the fine old buildings which dot the country side in the Tongaat ~ Fairbreeze and Maidstone area. He was latterly associat- ed with his brother, F. Ravjee who was a leading Builder in Durban and who was instrumental in putting some of the best known buildings in the city’s Indian area. He served as a Supervisor for over twenty years until his death in 1960 at the age of sixty. “130 PEMA, Kanjee: Director of Com- panies. b. 28th February, 1921, at Tavdi, India. Educated: Fairbreeze, Carlisle Street and Sastri College. Son of -Kanjee Ravjee. Origin: Tavdi, Navsari, India. Joined the firm of Warwick Stores in 1949, ls now Manager and Director. Was associated with M. Ravjce pre- viously. Also Director: Atlas Wholesalers, Merebank Depart- mental Stores and Merebank Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Has travelled widely — Thailand, Viet- nam, Singapore, Japan, Hong Kong and the Phillipines, India and African countries. Rec.: Philately and Coin Collecting. Keen on all Indian Affairs. Member: Tavdi Mandal — India. Rec.: Cricket and Soccer 1st XI’s (Sastri College), Was captain of Bharat C.C.; Married: Ratan, daughter of Morar Bhaga of Veraves, Navsari, India; § 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1435, 43 Etna Lane. Phone: 349265; 345159. Res. Add.: 25 Cross Street, Durban. Phone: 63030, TS) BABOOLAL, Kanjee: Business- man. b. 28th December, 1933, at Durban. Cafe Owner — Kit Kat Cafe. Director: Merebank Depart- mental Stores (Pty.) Ltd. Interest- ed in all local Sports and Activities. Member: Tavdi Mandal, India. Married: Premilla, daughter of Morar Hari of Johannesburg; § 1; D 2; Bus. Add.: 85 Warwick Avenue, Durban. Res. Add.: 510 Himalaya House, Warwick Aven ue, Durban. 1782 DR. DEVA, Kanjee: L.M.; L.R.C.P.; Ireland, Dublin Royal College of Surgeons. Arrived in South Africa, 1965. Educated: Hindu-Tamil, Sastri College and Durban Royal College of Surgeons. Takes a kéen interest in all local activities. Member: Row- ing Club — College. Rec.: Swim- ming, T.T, and Dancing. Private Practice — Merebank; Married: Dharmyanthie; S 3,

---

## Page 6

158 4383 KAPITAN, Choonilal Kesurbhai: Businessman. Db. Sth October, 1922, Navsari, India. Educated: Navsari, Johannesburg Primary School, Son of Kesurbhai Jivan. Arrived in South Africa in 1930. After some years, returned to India in 1938 where he remained until 1945. Established own business ~— Kapitan’s Bazaar — 1948. General Retailers and Importers of fancy goods. Acts.: Was connected with various Sports and was an ardent Phy- sical Culturist in India and South Africa; Treasurer: Benoni Hindu Maha Sabha; Past Sec.: Benoni Hindu Seva Samaj and Priest Trustee of the organisation. Was a member of Benoni Ind. Liason Com. — Group Areas; Member: Benoni Indian C.W.S. Rec.- Physical Culture and Swimming; Married: Hira, daughter of Gopal Mastri, S 1; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 5073, Benoni South. Phone: 543869. Res. Add.: 316 Patel Street, Actonville, Ext. 2. 734 KARDANI (Shaik Kader): Magi- cian. b. 12th October, 1913, Greyville, Durban, Natal. Edu.: Mitchell Crescent — Durban. Son om Fen > of Shaik Kader Dada. Origin: . Delhi, India. Runs unique business. "tye Only one of its kind in South —— Africa supplying equipment to a, professional and amateur magi cians. Also active as a magician, “Kardani”. Has been active in Charity and professional shows throughout the Republic and East African Territories. Professional magician and an ilusionist since 1933. Inventor and supplier of new tricks and equipment throughout the world. Runs only correspondence course for aspiring magicians in the African Territories. Hypno- tist, Hypoterapist, Magic Specialist and Illusionist — Internationally known. Member: International Brother- hood of Magicians (U.S.A.); Hon. Member: Maya Jaal (Calcutta). (international Magic Organiser). Rec.: Study of Magic and Illusion; Married: Kathoon, daughter of Shaik Fareed of Roodepoort, Johannesburg; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 9440, Johannesburg ~ Phone: 8366587. Res. Add.: 6 — Twelfth Street, Lenasia. Phone: 281. 18S KARODIA, Abdul Haque {smail: Businessman. byeg2nd February, 1923 at Verulam, Natal. Educated: Ladysmith Govt. Indian School. Son of Ismail Karodia. Runs trading store. at Tayside, near Dundee. Takes interest in all activities. Cricket: Bethal C.C.; Kismet C.C.; Sansar Social Club; Rep. Northern Natal vs Pietermaritzburg (1946) at Cricket. Married: Khatija M. Coovadia. Bus. Add.. P. O Tayside, Natal, Phone: 2; Res. Add.: Tayside, Phone: > THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO KARODIA, Essack Mohamed: Businessman and Director of Companies; b. 3rd December, 1925, Lower Tugela District, Natal. Educated: Stanger High School. Son of Late Mohamed Essack Karodia of Stanger and Sanjoli- District Surat, India. Began business career in 1957. Managing Director of large furniture organisation. Has made great strides in business over last ten years. Director of Companies — Selmo Furniture & Electrical (Pty.) Ltd. Rec. Travel; Bus. Add.: 91 Couper Street, Stanger — Phone: 69. Res. Add.: 20 Rood Street, Phone: 599. 73% KATHREE, Abdul Haque Ebra- him: Businessman. b. 18th July, 1932. Educated: May Street and Greyville Indian School. Son of Ebrahim Kathree of Durban, Natal and Aukleshwar, District Surat, India. Began at the age of thirteen. Initially inclined towards Motor Mechanics. Took up Radio Engineering as a hobby. Opened own business — “Same Day Radio” — in 1958. One of leading Radio Repair business in city. Also stockists of Radio Spares. Interested in all local activities. Keen Soccer and Cricket fan. Married: S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: 81 Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 69679. Res. Add.: 130 First Avenuc, Phone: 69291. l1e¢7 KATHREE, Mohamed Ebrahim: Businessman. b. Ist October, 1923, Cavendish, Natal. Educated: Higher Grade, Durban. Second son of Ebrahim Kathree of Ankiesh- war, District Surat, India. One of leading Sound Technicians in this country. Resp. for Sound equip- ment during the Royal Visit, 1947, the Kennedy visit in 1966 and numerous other V.LP. functions over the years. Was elected to Local Affairs Committee in 1965. — Vice Chairman. Recorded highest number of votes. Re-elected, 1966. Member: Executive — Isipingo Beach Muslim Association, Isipingo Beach Mosque and Madressa Trust. Member: I. B. Education Committee; Vice Chairman: I. B. Pe wAdt Treasurer: |. B. Life Saving Club; Chairman: Ocean City F. C,; Executive Member: L B. Cricket Association, I. B. Grounds Association; Vice Chairman: IL. B. Civic Associa- tion; Member: Isipingo Hills High School Finance Comm.; Treasurer: Salamat Institute; Director: I. B. Institute ; Re-elected to L.A.C. 1968/69/70/71. A supporter of numerous deserving Causes throughout the country. Travel: Middle East and Haj — 1971/72. Married: Ayesha Cassim - D 3; Bus. Add.: 43 Beatrice Street, Durban — Phone: 64976. Res. Add.: Third Avenue, Isipingo Beach, Natal, Phone: 91531. ‘3 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO “128 of Tongaat a A eee Kassies arrived in South Africa in 1886 s in Nonoti, in the Darnall area, where he we attached to the Huletts and after six months hasten ro Cad Wes transferred to the Akitts who faring lle an end ase which is now known as Aberfoyle. pire ple a with the Akitts he bought his farm at nines armed successfully in tobacco and market produce. It was this stage that he married Babuni Sewak and with the added cares of a growing family he bought © a farm nearer Tongaat. Together with several of the early pace families of Tongaat, he was instrumental in uilgints the Veshwaroop Temple ~ the skill, labour and A ii tee his contribution. His four sons, Ramnarain adrinarain, Sugrohim and Ganeshnarai narsh : é 1 K ain, incidently, we responsible for the buildin i i sien ; ig Operations. The Gokha Memorial Hall, also ack ade Q nowledges the family’s c i tion where skill, labour and trar carey at > skill, transport of the undertaki was supplied freely by the Kassie fami Siaata ela nm a Sa Kassie amily. Kassie was a . . Besides farming he also _ tri i man. | ried his ae at gold Itai in the Transvaal where he spent rane community lost a man remarkable i : ema n many ways when he died at the early age of sixty five. His charitable nature endeared him to many. He was dee igi aaa y. He was deeply religious and a strict = 189 ey hela Second son of Kassie, was born in 1905 ral aa on the family estate for a while. The building pi ie Tew him in 1918 and he joined a Mr. Mitha who reescad him ithe there was to know about the trade a was one of the builders who was b tom : Iders vas brought fro on to set up the Central Factory which belonged to me eee who milled their sugar there. The same oe ry now houses the Timberite industry. The building ee concern of B. Kassie and Sons while stablished in 1948. Budnarain now leads ired life - at udni Y sa retired life Hb Eve iresligaht aval concern. Budnarain married aras , daughter of Sookhan Hurbans, anoth pe at: er well aleteg a ef Tongaat and there are five sons and four 1 ‘ he marriage. The eldest, Amri i School Principal at M 5 eee Sched. at al a ohange State Aided Sc See ean BC ided School at _ Th second, Hari B. Kassie qualifed as < ata het alls at Assam, India aud Brentecsth a ml ollege and is now practising at Inanda. A second eng bala qualified recently as a nurse at King enaahed mony bh udrinarain is a Trustee of the : mple and Dharamshala of Tonga: ‘ my nc snate dat z Q alee ae Life Socicty. He is also a Ct Agar eo and the Tongaat Ratepayers The Kassie Family 2a 159

---

## Page 7

160 ge The Kathrada Amod Family 7WA0 AMOD KATHRADA: b. 1867 in Kathor, District Surat, India. Educated: Vernacular and French. Son of Hafez Mohamed Kathrada of Kathor, District Surat, India. Amod Kathrada, like most others of the Surti community went to Mauritius before embarking for South Africa where he settled in Verulam. He arrived in this country at the age of eightceen and joined his father in business on the banks f the Uimdhloti River at a place called Umdhioti Drift. There were many hazards in those days, not least being the river itself which came down in full spate many times in the fifteen years of the family’s stay there. The great flood at the close of the century forced the family to Verulam where they opened their second trading store in Wick Street. It was only in 1959 that the family eventually moved to their new and modern departmental store not far from the original one. He was married in Mauritius to girl who came of the Bilai family, in Port Louis. ai a GOOLAM, Hoosen Kathrada joined his father in business at the age of nineteen. Educated at Higher Grade School, he is credited with the development of the business and the family’s ex- pansion in other fields. Activities: Founder Member and Secretary: Verulam Madressa Koovathi Islam — He was its first Secretary and held both posts for over twenty years. His retirement from these posts came as a result of ill-health. He was one of the first to act as Commissioner of Oaths in the district of Verulam/Inanda. He was also Secretary of the Orient Club, Durban. He was a Founder Member and Secretary of the Verulam Rate- payers Association. One of the few Indians to held the municipal vote he exercised this right to the end efvhis days, He was also Patron of the Verulam Clinie Board. Married: Kathija Vahed of Durban. Goolam Hoosen Kathrada was a keen Sportsman and played both Tennis, Soecer and Cricket. He travelled extensively and perform- ed the Haj twice during his life time. He died at the age of sixty two on the 11th December, 1962. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHOS WHO MOHAMED. G. H. Kathrada: “Director of Companies; b. Sth February, 1921, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Umdhloti Govt. Aided Indian School and Sastri College. Eldest son of G. H. A. Kathrada of Verulam and grandson of Amod Kathrada of Kathor, District Surat, India. Managing Director of Amod Kathrada & Son of Veru- lam (Established 1885) and Director of Medina Wholesalers. Trustee: G. H. A. Kathrada Family Trust; Verulam Madressa Koovathi Islam. Commissioner of Oaths for the District of Imanda and Verulam. Past Patron: Verulam Indian Clinic Board; Member: Verulam Y.M.M. Society. Sports: Rep. North Coast Cricket Association (Captain 1948/49). Was active Soccerite and Tennis Player. Takes interest in all Religious, Social, Educational and Sports activities in various capacities. Haj: 1954. Toured Europe and U.K. Married: Amina, Yusuf Asmall of Bulwar; $ 1. Bus. Add: 47 Wick Street, Verulam. Phone: 9 and 139 - Verulam. Res. Add.: 53 Wick Street, Verulam — Phone: 333. 743 A. H. G. H. Kathrada: Business- man. b. 10th January, 1933 at Verulam. Educated: Umdhloti and Tongaat High School. Isa Director of family business of Amod Kathrada & Son of Verulam. An active member of various Educa- tional, Social, Religious and Sports organisations. Member: Verulam Y.M.M.A. Society; Member: Verulam I.C.W. Society; Plays cricket at club level. Rep. Natal “By at Ladysmith (1960/ 61). Rep. Verulam Cricket Union (1958/67). Was active Soccerite. Rec.: Gardening, Angling and Travel. Married: Ayesha, daughter of G. H. Mayet of Durban; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: 47 Wick Street, Verulam, Phone: 9 and 139. Res. Add.: 35 Wick Street, Phone: 333, atal. Verulam, Nata 7944 ISMAIL, G.H. Kathrada: Director of Companies and L.A.C. b. 18th June, 1926, Verulam. Educated : Umdhloti and Sastri College. Chairman: Town Board, Verulam. was connected with the Kingsgate Group of Durban. Now in business in Verulam. Keen Sportsman: Cricket and Tennis. One of out- standing Member of the Indian Community, in Local Politics, Welfare and Public Activities. Married: Fathima A. Moola; D 1. Phone: 41. Res. Add.: Russel Street, Verulam, q THE SOUTHERN AFRICA oe WHO'S WHO KEERATH, Mannie H.: Supervi- sor of Schools. Inspector of Edu- cation. Born 25th June, 1919, Isipingo, Natal. Educated: Isipingo School, Carlisle Street and Sastri College B.A.; U.E.D. Past Prin- sipal: Orient High, Clairwood High, Sastri College. Activitics: Durban Benevolent Society; Child Welfare (Durban); Natal Indian Blind Society;Mem.: Meyrick-Bennett Child Guidance Clinic; Chairman: Isipingo Rail Local Affairs Com- mittee 1966 /67/68/69/70/71. Travel: America on study tour, Now Chairman: Isipingo Town Board. Travel: America on study tour, [965. Visited Europe, 1965. Sport: Rep. North Coast at Cricket. Married: Narayanama, daughter of B. V. Naidoo. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 14, Isipingo Rail; Phone: 313954. Res. Add.: 25 Jadwat Road, Isipingo, Phone: 91338. TAG KESHAVJEE, Badroo: Motor Trade. b. 29th April, 1926, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian Govt. School. Son of Allibhai Keshavjee. Origin: Chotila, Kathiawad, India. Interested in all activities of the Indian Community. Supports various charitable organisations. Keen sports follower. Began as Motor Trader in 1954 — Kay’s Garage — family concern. Established present Motor Dealer busi- ness M. A. Keshavjee — 1955. Also financer Motor Vehicles Hire Purchase. Interested in M/Battery business, managed by wife and Keshavjee Investments. Other Acts.: Was Secretary: H. H. the Aga Khan’s Prov. Edu. Board; Member: Ismailia Prov. Council (Port Social Welfare); Is at present S. A. Correspondent -- Arefa Ismaili Weekly News Magazine; Member: Economic Committee ~ Ismaili Community of South Africa. Rec.: Table Tennis, Soccer and Snookers. Travel: Ext. East Africa. Married: Dolly, daughter of M. J. Keshavjee of Pretoria; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 1205, Pretoria, Phone: 36846. Res. Add.: 239 Jerusalem Street, Pretoria Phone: 36846. 447 KESHAVJEE, Hydar Hassan: Businessman. b. Ist June, 1930, Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Indian Govt. School. Son of Hassan Keshavjee. Origin: Chotila, India. Widely travelled: U.K. and Europe, Africa. One of early pioneer — Ismaili Com. -- Southern Africa. Earliest arrival, J. Keshavjee. Holds various other posts in local orgs. — extremely active. Activities: Patron: N. T. Tennis Asso., Port Folio Economics: H. H. Aga Khan’s Territorial Council §S.A.; Member: Consultative Committee Laudium; Treasurer: Asiatic Bazaar Traders Association; Rec.: Tennis, Table Tennis, Soccer. Married: Sakarkhanoo, daughier of Jadavjee Hajee, Louis Trichardt; S 3. D —. Bus. Add.: 521 Boom Street, Asiatic Bazaar; Phone: 27122. Res. Add.: 521 Boom Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phone: 26049. 198 KHALFE, Goolam Hoosen Bawa: Businessman. b. 2nd February, 1917, Tieda, District Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: Cape Town. Son of Bawa Khalfe. Arrived in South Africa in 1927. Joined family business, 1942 — B. Goolam & Sons — General Dealers; Travel: India, East Africa. Interested in ali local activities. Married: S 2;D 3; Bus. Add.: 13 Jordan Street, Cape Town. Phone: 28442. n94 167 KHAN, Gluzar Misree: (Councill- or). b. 7th May, 1923, Panhalje, District Ratnagiri, India. Sales Representative. Mdu.: Panhaljic, Depoli High School, Bombay Anjuman Islam, Elphiston College: (Bombay University). Son of Misree Khan. Arrived in South Africa, 1948. Teacher .— on the * teaching staff of Habibia. Iidu. Institute: 1948/63. Joined Rep. ficld, 1962 Universal Conf. Wks. and others. Was honoured at Foundation Stone laying — Bontehcuval Mosque. Interested in Amateur Dramatics. Keen student of religion and culture (slamic). Conducted debating classes and Vernacular language classes for adults. Taught Mathematics, Eng- lisheand Urdu — under Tech. Sect. of Habibia Edu. Institete. Activities: Was H.L.V.P.: W.P.I.C.U.; Vice Pres.: Orient Muslim Sports Club; Patron: Cape of Good Hope Walking Club; President: S. Cape Table Tennis Union; Member: Editorial Board “Muslim News’. Founder: Al Azhar Study Group; Member of the City Council, Cape Town; Member: Various Council Sub-committees. Travel: M.E., U.K., Europe, India, Pakistan. Went on a student tour and also performed Haj. Rec.: Cricket, Soccer, Table Tennis, Walking; Married: Farida, daughter of G. Allie of Cape Town; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 17, Athlone. Phone: 692718. Res. Add.: 38 Greef Strect, Salt River, Phone: 555044. Sx> KHAN, Hashmet: Businessman. b. Ist February, 1934, Kalusta, Ratnagiri, India. Son of Omar Khan. Entered business scene 1953. Established first business, Murad poor Bazaar, Stellenbosch. First of Robot organisations; Robot Super Market 1968; Elsies River 1969; Gleemoor, 1969. One of leading N. W. Supermarkets in the Peninsula. President: Robot Sports Club and Rec. Centre; Joint Secretary: Habibia Orphanage; Com. Member: Cape Town Spurs (Finance Com.); Executive Member: Rylands Citic Association; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket, Indian Class Music and Urdu Literature; Married: S 2; D 3; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 127, Elsies River, Cape Province Phone: 694801. Res. Add.: 47 Munta Road, Rylands. SO} KHALFE, Ahmed Ismail: Businessman. b. 5th September, 1921, Latvar, Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: Dapoli, India; St. Augustine, Cape Town. Son of Ismail Khalfe Bawa. Director of Companies. Is also Director of Parkers Travel Agency, Cape Town. Activities: Was active in various sports organisations; Tennis, Cricket. Treasurer: Habibia Educational Institute: Cape Peninsula Traders Association; Executive Member: Habibia Orphanage: Trustee: Kuwatul Islam Mosque. Also connected with leading Religious, Social and Cultural bodies in the Peninsula. Chairman: Dapoli Educational Society (India), Cape Branch. Rec.: Cricket, Tennis. Travel: India and Pakistan. Married: Aziza, daughter of Shaik Allie Bawa of Cape Town. Bus. Add.: 130 Kloof Street, Cape Town. Phone: 20907.

---

## Page 8

162 KHAN, Ahmed Hassan: Businessman and Transport Ope- rator. b. 10th July, 1932. Colenso, Natal. Educated: Colenso and Ladysmith Indian School. Son of Hassan Khan of Colenso and grandson of Late Sayed Hassan, Interpretor and Police Sergeant of Ladysmith at turn of century. Director and Manager of family concern in Transport and Cartage at Colenso. Established in 1930 and operating under the names of Colenso Motor Trans- port, Sayed Hassan & Colenso. Taxi Service. Also runs fresh produce business since 1933. Leading member of younger sct and interested in all Social and Communal matters affecting India; Community. Is a Committee Member and Past Secretary of the Colenso Madressa and Mosque Trust; Grantee: Col./Ind. School; Secretary « Col.} Ind. Ratepayers Association; President: Goodwill Society Club; Coloured Association with all Sports. Was active Soccerite. Rec.: Badminton and Table Tennis. Married : Hawa, daughter of Late Hajee Abdul Aziz Karrim of Ladysmith; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 45, Colenso; Phone: 41. Res. Add.: 15/17 Sir George Street, Colenso; Phone: 21, Colenso, Natal. sow KHAN, Dawood Abdullah: Businessman. b. 7th August, 1930, Maitland, Cape Province. Educated: Maitland and Trafalgar High School. Son of Abdullah Khan. Origin: Sakhol, Ratnagiri, India. Director of Companies. Is a Councillor of the Cape Town City Council — 1966/70. Now in for another two year period. ls interested in all THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO activities concerning Culture and Social upliftment of the larger community. Activities: Patron: Kensington Race Walkers Club, Nurul-Mobin Muslim Brigade, Manchester F. C.; Trustee: Hidayat-ul Islamic Mosque — Kensington Member: Vigilance Association — Kensington, Maitland Sports Board; Committee Member: Cape Town City Council Bantu and Housing Committee; Rec.: Soccer. Travel: India, Pakistan, Mauritius, E.A., P.E.A. and the Republic. Married: Habiba, daughter of Ebrahim Khan, S$ 5; D 3. Bus. Add.: 52, 14th Street — 15th Avenue, Kensington, Cape Province. Phone: 512898: Res. -Add.: 52, 14th Street — 15th Avenue, Kensington, Cape Province — Phone: 512898. Sos KHAN, Ebrahim Peer: Senior Clerk, Local Health Com. b. 6th February, 1934, Dannhauser, Natal. Educated: Wasbank Govt. Aided School and Windsor High, Lady- smith. Son of Peer Khan, pioneering: building contractor. Wasbank area. A social and religious worker in the district. Holds various posts in local organisations. Activities: Sec.: and Trustee: Wasbank Madressa Islamia Trust and Sec. and Committee Member: Wasbank State Aided School — Educational Committee; Secretary: Wasbank Indian Advisory Board. Also trading as Khan’s Cafe. Bus. Add.: P. O..Box 23, Phone: 4, Wasbank; Res. Add.: Helprekan Road, Wasbank — Phone: 4. IE EI ETE TE E E SUBEDAR, Khan, a soldier in the British Army in India, arrived in this country during the latter part of the 19th century and seemed to have led a colourful life. He was miner, trader, soldier and a host of other things during his stay here. His son, Himdad Khan, was born in Johannes- burg, and was educated at the Good Shepherd School, Pretoria. He joined the firm of Mustapha Hassim, Com- pany Secretaries and Bookkeepers in 1916, and in 1935, he took over the business to branch out on his own. He was active in all branches of sports and was ong of the founders of Indian tennis in the Transvaal ands South Africa. His other activities were: Ex. Treasurer: TAE.LA. (1935/41): President: S.A.LT.A. He was founder of the Rangers Tennis and Football Clubs: Hgnorary Life Vice President: $.A.I-L.T.A.; He was a Trustee of the Johannes- burg Indian Sports Ground Association. He died in July 1962 at the age of sixty tour. The Himdad Khan Family of Johannesburg S * SEEK IEE HE HEREIN KE AMANULLAH, Khan: Public Bookkeeper, Secretary of Com- panies and General Agent. b. 24th February, 1928 at Benoni, Tvi. Educated: Eur - African Training Centre. Son of Himdad Khan. Origin: Lucknow, India. Joined family business of Bookkeepers and Secretary of Companies in 1949. Took complete control, 1962. Interested in local and S.A. Tennis. Was Treasurer: Transvaal and S. A. Ind. L. T. A. (1950/62). Was also Secretary and Treasurer: Delfos C.C., Johannesburg — 1950/57. Hon. Auditor: Various Johannesburg Primary Schools — Coloured and India. Rec.: Indian Music and Travel, all Sports. Travel: M.E. and Haj; E.A., P.E.A., African Territories. Married: Khadija, daughter of Ameer Khan of Benoni, D=t; S-2; Bus. Add.: 11-13th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg. Phone: 352597. Res. Add.: 11-13th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg ~ Phone: 352597. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 163 NE KEI I HH HA BE RE XE REE EEK e HERA IK EB HOEXE BNE RE IEE HA HOEHER BO HEL BY HOEHY HOHE BE HE BH HOEHEHE IE BK I BE BK HH BA HE HK BE HX BK HK EB XE BK BK ERE I EH HERE KE HE IHS BE HEE XE x KEKE KE EE: The A. R. M. Khan Family of Durban SE EKER IK HE SEI NEL E HR IK SARE HE HEHE IO BH BA HEH HB HEHEHE HO I I HEB HOEHEH BBO BB BB HEH HEI BA BH HE HE BB BH EE I BKK BOG Born in Navsari, India, in 1895 Abdul Rehman, eldest son of Mehboob Khan, came to this country in 1913, He came of a large family of land owners in the District of Surat and from an early age joined the firm of E. G. Paruk and Sons. This was soon after his arrival in this country and he was connected with the firm for close on to forty five years, the greater part as the Company’s principal pearls He was one of the old guard of commerci Q who paved the way for present-day ea ieee day connected with both White and Indian traders in thi: country. In those days, with transport at a premium the first of these knights of the road had to travel on foot at first and later by train to customers throughout Natal and ing Transvaal. Pioneering this field and contributing in no small way to the opening up of the interior to trade, he was known for his impeccable dress sense and there were very few Moslems who took to Western dress ~ the majority retaining their Eastern attire with fanatical zeal A keen student, his early schooling being completed = Navasari High School, he was adept at both Gujarati and Urdu. He died on the 13th June, 1958. a FOR B07 As at Sharif A. R. Khan: Director. b. 9th Sept f 27, Greyville, Durban. Educated: Greyville Govt. fd. School and Sastri College. Eldest son of A. R. M. Khan of Navasari and Durban. Director: Judy Stocking Bar (Pty.)° - Ltd. Was connected with Estcourt N ylons for over s years (1960/67). Sole Indian Rep. in the Sadi "Estab, y’s Stocking Bar — 1968 — one of the i ead vol ckin provinces lead eos distributors to the trade at manufacturers ths ports: Billiards, Cricket, Tennis. Married: S$ 1; D 4 Bas Add.: 278 Grey Street, Durban. Phone: 27615; Res, Add.: 36 Mitchell Road, Durban — Phone: 67743. rae ‘ ie pp ee a Govt. Indian School . R. Mz an. Director: Judy’s Stocki ; rt (Pty.) Ltd. Sports: Cricket, Soccer; FESS iy us. Add.: 278 Grey Street, Durban; Phone: 27615; Res. Add.: 102 North Street, Durban; Phone: 67743. aa Foy YOUR oo le R. Khan: b. 2nd August, 1943, at Greyville than. Educated: Greyville Govt. Ind. School. Youn est rages < R. M. Khan. Director of Companies: Teas ara ar Be creat Distributors — Nylon A Aces. Sports: Cricket and Tennis. Bac 4 ee Add. 278 Grey Street, Durban; Bieue audio ee d.: 102 North Street, Durban, Phone: 67743. ERA IA HH BLEEK

---

## Page 9

164 HEIR HE TE HEE RE BE HE HEHE EE % THE SOU THERW AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO MIA MS SI BEI BE 9 I IB AD BD DE 2 The Hajee Ebrahim Kahn Family of Durban (FALCON) PR IK ERB IH HOEHLH I HEHEHE HB BHO HOES BOB BO HE HERB BH HE RHE BIE HOEHEH BH BX HH SOL BEB HO HOEROH BE HE HE SLI HH HF 0 9 38 3 3 3 DL I EJ FR 6 EE KE IE EERE EK EK The family traces its arrival in South Africa to the mid seventy’s and settled in the Tongaat area. Sathar Khan was one of the few North West Frontiersmen to settie here. He was attached to the Tongaat Sugar Mills — and served as a Clerk, recording the names of workers in Urdu at which he was well versed. He served in the Boer3Warand was in business in the Tongaat area until his death during the depression. Habibulla Khan was the eldest son of Sathar Khan and had a fine Urdu education and graduated at the Sufi Sahib Madressa at Riverside. He has been attached to the Flower Road Mosque as an Imam since 1922. He also served in the 1914-18 war in the East African campaign. He was born in 1898 at Tongaat and is still an active figure in the Religious and Cultural fields. SM HAJEE, Ebrahim H. Khan: (Fal- con). b. 19th June, 1921 at Tongaat. Educated: St. Michael’s ~ Rossburgh. Son of Habibullah Khan. Origin: Patli, N.W. Frontier. Was in various occupations from the age ef eighteen. Established Falcon Motor Spares — 1960. Was in armed forces in 1939/45 con- flict, E.A., M.E. and Italian campaigns. Travel: Europe, U.S., Far East, U.K., India, Pakistan, Canada, South America and other countries. Runs one of the largest scrap yards in Southern Africa — Kings of S. H. Spares and Scrap Metal. Activities: Educational Com.: Asipingo Muslim Association; Chairman: Flower Road Muslim Society; Patron: South Coast and District Muslim Association; Committee Member: S. A. Cols. Ex. Service- mens. League; Committee Member: S. Durban Civic Association — Isipingo Beach Citizens Association; Del.: S.A.C.C.L. on various occasions; Del.: Building Workers Union. Rec.: Angling, Boxing, Travel. Married: Jainub, daughter of Y. Bashiro Khan; S 7; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 91, Mobeni, Natal — Phone: 818642. Res. Add.: 24 Bellevue Road, Isipingo Beach — Phone: 91295. Siz MOHAMED, Araaf E. Khan b. April, 1943. Educated: Clairwood Madressa. Managing Director: Falcon Food Products — General Millers. Married: Jainub Ebrahim; S 1; D2 WAS WAHED,. E. Khan: b. 8th July, 1944. Educated: C. Madressa School. Buyer — Falcon Motor Spares. Interests: Motoring and Travel. iy FAROUK, E. Khan: Sales Manager — Falcon Motor Spares. Married: Rabia R. M. Khan. aS FARHAD, E. Khan: b. 19th April, 1958. Student — Jamia Rizvia College — Theology. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA (ee WHO'S WHO 165 KHAN, Ismail (Cajee): Shopkeep- er; b. 6th August, 1909, Ghala, India. Educated: Ghala, Kathor and Rander, India. Son of Gulab- khan Patel. Arrived in South Africa, 1919. Settled in Schweizer Reneke. Moved to Louis Trichardt and then to Munich (A. Adam & Co.). Established A. Adam & Co., ‘ Pietersburg in 1935. Takes keen interest in all Communal Activi- a " ties. Travel: India, Pakistan; E.A:, \ ; / P.E.A., M.E., Rhodesia and Bechuanaland. Married: Khairen- bibi, daughter of Hassan Shaikjee of Johannesburg; $ 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: 79 Market Street, Phone: 3915, Pietersburg; Res. Add.: 77 Market Street, Phone: 6028. ee 2) KHAN, Osman Mohamed: B.A., Principal. b. 2/1909. Educated: Fairbreeze Indian School. Son of Mohamed Khan of U.P., India. Was appointed Principal in 1955 and now stationed at Fairbreeze State Indian School. Graduate of Natal University — B.A. Is a leading Member of the community in the Tongaat and Maidstone areas. Chairman: Fairbreeze Rate- payers Association; Vice Chairman of Tongaat Indian Mill Group. Dist. Rep. for Fairbreeze — Indian Child Welfare Society (Tongaat); Patron: Maidstone — F.C.; Rep. Dist. at Tennis; Patron: Tongaat Indian High School Old Boys Club; Rec.: Ang- ling. Married: Safura, daughter of Allimuddin of Tongaat; S$ 1;D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 12, Maidstone, Phone: 28; Res. Add.: Fairbreeze, Maidstone. Big KHAN, Noor Mohamed: Secretary of Companies and Businessman. b. 17th August, 1920, Ladysmith, Natal. Educated: Ladysmith Govt. School. Qualified as Secre- tary of Companies — 1942. At present practising throughout Northern Natal with H.Q. at Lady- mith Insurance Agent — S.A. Eagle. Finance and Estate Agent; Wood and Coal Merchant. Other Activities: Patron: Monarch C.C. and Parkhill C.C., Ladysmith; Was President: Ladysmith Y.M. Society; Secretary and Chairman: Executive Council — Ladysmith Mosque and Madressa Trust; Trustee: Ladysmith Indian Educational Trust; Was a Member of N.LO. from inception. Also led various delegations — local and state level — has been active in almost every sphere of activity affecting Indians in N. Natal. Trustee: Mosque and Madressa Trust; Spokesman and Del.: Indian Community — to Ministry of Community Development — Group Areas. Rec.: Game Hunting and Sports. Marrieds Ayesha, daughter of Sher Mohamed Khan of Ladysmith. S 2; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 55, Lady- smith — Phone: 380. Res. Add.: 56 Forbes Street, Phone: 179. 814 KHAN, Jumna Zardad: Business- man. b. 15th February, 1921, Hattingspruit. Educated: Dundee Indian School. Son of Hajee Zardad Khan an early pioneer of the Glencoe area. Origin: Kambal- pur District, P. O. Khandharpur, Hassanabdal, U.P., India. Leading butcher in Glencoe. Bus. estab. by father in 1923. Became partner in concern in 1940. Took sole charge at retirement of father in 1951. Takes interest in all local activities. Activities: Is a Trustee: Glencoe Mosque and Madressa Trust; Former Treasurer and Committee Member: Was appointed in Advisory capacity to Glencoe Municipality and nominated Member of Local Affairs Committee by Adm-in-Exec. in 1965; re-appointed again in 1966 and 1967, for furhter two years. Sports: Active Soccerite — G.LF.C. and Stars F.C. — 1940/45. Member: Misconduct Board — Glencoe F.A.; Delegate to N. Districts for Glencoe F.A., Keen participant Snooker, Billiards, Table Tennis. Married: Fathima, daughter of Shafiatullah of Pietermaritzburg; S 3; D 5. Bus. Add.: 56 Biggar Street, dhe 55; Res. Add.: 15a Waschbank Road, Glencoe, atal. 820 KHAN, Hajee Rehiman: Business- man. b. 1919, Khed, Ratnagiri, India. Son of Moheedien Khan. Joined family concern, 1938. Established own business in Mait- land in 1939. First Dry Cleaning on the Peninsula (1958). Has travelled widely. Other Activities: Past Chairman: Elsies River Muslim Educational Society; Eastern Mus- lim Sports Club; Trustee: Nur-ul- {slam Mosque, Salt River, Dapoli High School — India; Ex. Member: Habibia Educational Institute; Koloobul Momineen Mosque— Goodwood; Patron: —Khed Muslim Community; Rec.: Student of Religion. Married: Amina, daughter of Hajce {smail Khan; D J, Bus. Add.: 9 Junction Road, Salt River, Phone: 558215. Res. Add.: 24 Voortrekker Road, Salt River, Cape Province — Phone: 558215.

---

## Page 10

166 e i 2\ KHAN, Sadullah: Hafez-ul-Quran (Cape Town). b. 30th November, 1959, Springs, Transvaal. Edu.: Vryburg Primary and Schotschek- loof Primary. Son of Ahmed Khan Origin: Bombay, India. One of youngest Hafez-ul-Quran in the country. Graduated at age of nine in Cape Town. Eldest son of Ahmed Khan, grandson of Saleh Khan and great grandson of Hajee Ebrahim Khan of Panville, Bom- bay, India and Vryburg. One of early pioneers (1874) in Vryburg area. Was at Kimberley, Mafeking and finally Vryburg, where he traded. Died in 1946 in India at the age of hundred. Founder of Vryburg Mosque, 1887. First Mosque built in Northern Cape. Rec.: All Sports, Cricket and Soccer. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 90, Vryburg — Phone: 414; Res. Add.: 1 Lawrie Street, Vryburg — Phone: 1069. S22 KHATANI, Cassim Suleman: Director of Companies; b. 2/1920, Aliabada, Kathiawad, India. Educated: Carlisle Street and Sastri College. Son of Hajee Suleman, Khatani. Was at first associated with family concern of Egyptian House at Umbogintwini. Established own business in 1945 — Moorleigh Stores, Bellair. Traded at Cato Manor and after 1949 riots began afresh in same area. Opened Khatani Trading in Sparks Road, 1953. Manufacturer of soap and candles — Dandy Products — factory at Sirdar Road, Clairwood. Is a Trustee of Mohamediya Mosque — Overport. Takes keen interest in religious matters. Per- formed Haj 1953 and 1968. Toured Middle East; East/ Central Africa. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1, Overport; Res. Add.: 12 Sparks Road, Overport, Durban — Phone: 886531 — Res; Phone: 884617 — Business. g2s KHEDOO, Inderjeeth: Transport Operator: b. 6th April, 1911, Umtwalumi, Natal, South Coast. Educated: Clair- wood Govt. Aided School. Youngest son of Late S. Khedoo of Umtwalumi and Balia, Bhojpur, U.P., India. One of the first Transport Operators in Merebank. Estab. Merebank Contractors (Cartage) in 1931. Settled in area in 1919, Takes keen interest in all matters affecting community. Activities: Sports: Patron: Alipore Road State Aided Sports Club; C.M.C.: (Van Dyk) Sports Club; Past Treasurer and Trustee: Hindi Patshala Merebank; Merebank Literature and Debating Society; Committce Member and Trustee: Shri Samatha Dharham Sabha (Natal); Committee Member and Treasurer: Merebank and District Devi Puja (1950/69); Member: Merebank Indian Ratepayers Association; L/Member: Merebank Samatha Dharma Woonathe Sabha; Shree Ramayan Sabha; Mcre- bank; Committee Member: Merebank Indian Association; Married: Bhagwanthi, daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. Desai of Wellbedacht; D 2. Bus. and Res. Add.: 174 Chen- ab Road, Merebank — Phone: 87489. THE a CU ET al INDIAN WHO'S WHO KHATIB, Abbas: Businessman. b. 26th January, 1922, Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: Ratnagiri, Chiplun, Bombay and Ind. Muslim School — Muir Street, Cape Town. Son of Abdul Gaffoor Khatib. Joined business, 1939 —T. Ebrahim — Muir Street, Cape Town. Established own business A. G. Stores — 1948 and Terminus Storesin 1957. Retail Merchants. Interested in Religious studies and is a “Student of Philosophy”. Activities: Chairman: Eastern United C.C., Elsies River Muslim Society; Arabic Classes — E.R.M. Society; Chiplun Welfare Society; Holds various other posts in Civic, Religious, Cultural bodies and Sports. Sports: Table Tennis, Swimming and Mountain Climbing; Rec.: Classical Music. Married: S 4; D 2. Bus. Add.: 540 Halt Road, Elsies River, Cape Province, Phone: 989213. KHOJA, Hassimalli Jadavjee: Mnfrs. Representative; b. 7th March, 1917, Ranavav, Saurastra, India. Educated: Louis Trichardt Indian School. Son of Jadavjee H. Khoja. Fond of travel — East and P. E. Africa. Keen on ail local Activities. Eldest son in pioneei Ismaili family in Louis Trichardt. Business — H. R. Khoja & Co. Was associated with family concern up to 1954. Activities: Chairman: H. H. Aga Khans Territorial Council -- Welfare Section. Member: H. H. Ismailia Council; Shia tmami Ismailia Community. Rec.: Tennis, Table Tennis. Married: Noorbanu, daughter of G. J. Mohamed of Lourenco Marques. S 1;D 6. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 2768, Pretoria — Phone: 793687; Res. Add.: 321 - 12th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. e276 KAJEE, Ahmed Sadeck. B: 12th Feb., 1930, in Durban. Y/s/o A. I. Kajee. Businessman. Director- A.L. Kajee Group & Avalon Cine- ma Chain Group of Co’s. Was a Grantee - Avoca and Fannin Schs. Took a keen interest in all other local activities. Sports - Soccer. Widely travelled. Died: 26th April, 1973, in London. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 167 PER HER HAE BOHRA TOR TAT TO TB HS BO BOB HM A ERE BA BX BA 3B 3 3 3 3 9 3 HH The Pungan Kisten Family of Tea Estates, Inanda HERI KE IEEE KEE MR FE IK BK HK HE HEHEHE KE HK HK IKK HABA IEE IA IA IAB IKEA BI EAE BH BBS BH BHD SHI MH HHI BHI BB BI BH EDI BB 9 OE BSE 87) PUNGAN, Kisten arrived in this country in 1907 on board the S.S. Umdhloti at the age of twenty five. Accompanied by his wife, the family settled at Groenberg. Here they worked in the Tea Plantations at Inanda. An outspoken man, Pungan Kisten was at one time in danger of being repatriated to India. He became a sirdar in the company’s service and fought for the rights of workers in the plantations. He was instrumental in having the local school established which was known as the O. Wolmer School and much later as the Moonsamy School. He died in 1959. He was born in Arcot District, Madras Presidency India, in 1862. $28 KISTEN: b. 1909, Tea Estates, Inanda. Began as Wattle Worker (Dryer), age seven at the low wage of twenty five cents per month, then Weeder at the age of eight in plan- tation at fifty cents. At the age of twelve Wattle Stacker aided by two women at seventy five cents. He became a Waggon-lead to the factory at upper-Inanda at R1,00 per month and a Stripper and Cutter at R10,00 per month at the age of fifteen. He leased a farm from a Mr. Nuttal and built his own hut. Later moved to Tea Estates and worked sixty acre leased land in Cane, Bananas and Pine. Acquired ‘forty five acres at Tea Estates, where the family resides to this day. $29 MOONSAMY: b. 1915, at Imanda. Educated: V. M. Primary School. Farmer — Inanda Area. Married: Moonimah, daughter of Late Moonsamy of Umbilo, Durban; S 6;D 4; Res. Add.: Tea Estates. 330 MARIEMUTHOO: b. 1917 at Inanda. Wyld Mem. Farmer — Inanda Area. Married: Mooniammah, daughter of Moonsamy Pillay, Tongaat; S 4; D 4. Res. Add.: Tea Estates. gd) NARAINSAMY: b. 1921 at Inanda. Educated: Wyld Mem. and O. Wolner School; Farmer — Inanda. Marrié@d? Valli- ammah, daughter of Late M. Naguran of Merebank; $ 1; D —; Member: Natal Estate Indian Mill Group. Res. Add.: Tea Estates.

---

## Page 11

168 THE P. KISTEN FAMILY Continued... $32 GOVINDSAMY, G. Perumal: Teacher; b. October, 1931 at Imanda. Educated: Primary Moonsamy and Stanger High; Springfield Training College B.A. (UNISA). Teacher at Tongaat High. In teaching profession since 1953. Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Other Activities: Pres.: Tea Estates Social Club; Married: Doreen, daughter of James Samuel of Umgeni, Durban; § 1; D 1; Res. Add.: Tea Estates. $23 SHUNMUGUM, Kisten: b. 13th July, 1936. Educated: Moonsamy Primary and Tongaat High. Matriculated. Teachers Diploma. Under-graduate B.A. Teaching, 1953, Talwanth Singh School. Principal: Platoon School (five years); Shri Gopallal. Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Athletics. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO B34 POONSAMY: b. 2nd February, 1938 at Inanda. Educated: Moonsamy Primary and Verulam High. Matriculated. N.T.D. (1960). Attached to Moonsamy State Aided School (Second year B.A.). Rec.: Soccer, Cricket. Keenly interest- ed in outside activities. Past Secretary: Tea Estates Social Club; Past Secretary* Verulam and District Schools Sports Association; Res. Add.: Tea Estates, Inanda. 82S" KARRIAPPEN, Kisten: b. 1941, at Inanda. Educated: Moonsamy Primary and Verulam High. Matriculated. N.T.D. (Springfield). Teacher — 1962. Attached to Moonsamy Primary State Aided. Final — B.A. Rec.: Soccer and Cricket. Res. Add.: Tea Estates, Inanda. Activities: Past Secretary: V and D Sports (School) Asso.; Past Treasurer: Tea Estates Social Club; Res. Add.: Tea Estates, POOBALAN, Kisten: Student — Moonsamy Primary School. HAH KE RABE IM HE HOEHE EB I HOEHE HOE LHL IE BIH HEB IU HIE HEHEHE I HE HE HE HEH I HE HE HEHE RB BE HE HK BO HE RL A OE BH BB HO BBB The Allibhai A. Khoja Family of Pretoria 836 x x x x Ed % : Fae} i HEIR AIK IEEE IA IR EHH IK BEY SEE HW HIE HEHEHE HOHE NEI I BSE HE HERE I I HEHE BEI DHE BEM IEE BB BE HI DH I I HIM FARR IK ALLIBHAI, Anandjee Khoja (Late): Director of Com- panies. b. 20th October, 1893 at Moti Aneli, India. Edu.: India — Vernacular. Origin: Moti, Aneli, India. Widely travelled — U.K., Europe, Middle East, India, African countries. Activities: Member: Ismaila Council; Chairman: Ismaila Education Board. Died: 17th February, 1968. Family Address: 599 Carl Street, Pretoria, Transvaal. 33) SHABUDIN, Allibhai Khoja: Director of Companies. b. 27th November, 1927 at Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Allibhai Anandjee Khoja. Origin: Moti Aneli, India. Widely travelled — Africa. Has lived in Kenya number of years. Toured U.K. and Europe, 1964. Has business interests overseas. One of leading Members of Ismaili community. Activities: Life Vice President: Northern Transvaal Tennis Association (1968); H.H. The Aga Khan’s Council (1965); Life Trustee: Ismaila Jamaat Khana (1965); Rec.: Tennis and Table Tennis. Married: Goolbanoo, daughter of Cassim Hajee;D 1. Bus. Add.: 509 Carl Street, Pretoria; Phone: 794095; Res. Add.: 331 - 12th Avenue, Pretoria — Phone: 793688. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 169 YER RE RK KEE S25 KOLA, Suliman, Ismail: Insurance Broker. Joined teaching profession in 1953 at the Waterval Govt. Indian School — Snr. History and Mathematics. Part-time Insurance Agent the same year. In 1962 joined the Prudential Assurance Co., becoming the Southern Hemisphere’s top life Ass. Sales- men, exceeding a million rand each year since joining the Co. and in 1968, he topped the R2,000,000 mark (approx. 3m. Dollars). This was far in excess of any other agent of any other Co., White or non-White. Mr. Kola became a Life Member in 1969. This signal honour requires six consecutive years of assurance underwriting of over a million dollars each year. The year 1969 saw the establishment of the first non- Solly Kola Insurance Broker BRILL EEK x White Assurance Brokerage Co. in the Republic with the setting up of The Solly Kola Insurance Brokers (Pty.) Ltd., a company which is the first of its kind in this country. As a result of his outstanding achievements in the Insurance field in the past, certain Companies are now co-operating in a set-up which caters for trained personel to serve the interests of the Companies taking part in the training scheme. The Group also caters for experienced salesman to under-write assurance as brokers for various companies. Under brokerage the man in the street has a wider choice in the selection of the type of assurance most suited to his needs. It also brings to the insurer the bene- fits and better values in insurance which he would not normally enjoy from one particular company. Mr. Kola, as a direct Broking Unit organiser, is continually negotiat- ing with certain companies to give the Indian Community special European rates and benefits and in fact has succeeded in obtaining for Indians, the same medical requirements. Add.: 28 Bree Street, Fordsburg, Jhb., Tvl. S34 KOOVERJEE, Babu Nager: Busi- nessman. b. llth August, 1928, Cape Town. Educated: Methodist School, Wynburg & Livingstone High. Eldest son of Nager Koover- jee of Undach, District Surat, India. Family Manufacturing business of Harness & Footwear was established in 1921. Entered general retail business in 1941. Outfitting and Fancy-goods, 1951. Known as Bata’s Footwear Store. Interests: Weightlifting, Cricket and Mountaineering. Other Activities: Past Secretary: United Hindu Association; Gandhi Memorial School afd the Kshatriya Gujarati Mandal. Patron of various non- ‘Vhice sports bodies. Sponsors numerous codes. Past Member: British Amateur Body-building Association. Also Artist and Musician, Bombay Army & Navy Stores Gold Medalist. Travel: U.K., Europe and African countries. Married: Prabha, daughter of Narotham Kassan; S 3;D 1. Bus. Add.: 33/35 Park Road, Wynburg, Cape Province. Phone ~~ 291 Pes, Add.: Park Road, Wynburg. Sto KAJEE, Ismail, Abdulla. Business- man. B: Durban. Edu.: Durban. E/s/o A. Kajee. Director - A.I. Kajee (Pty) Ltd. Was one of silent workers in Religious, Cul- tural & Welfare activities. Took a keen interest in all local sports. Died at Mecca, Saudi Arabia, on 11th April, 1965.

---

## Page 12

170 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 171 % ES & i e < | e @ : The Kooverjee Family ad | The Krishna Family x ° x oe : of Uitenhage : of Pretoria x x s+) The first of the Kooverjee’s of Uitenhage arrived in this country in 1908 and settled in De Aar. Shuka Kooverjee, father of Ambelal Kooverjee, who. is presently managing the well-known firm of Kooverjee of Uitenhage, was one of the first Indian Shoe Repairers in the little town. After a few trips to India he returned to South Africa with his wife in 1928. By 1926, the family owned several proper- ties in De Aar. The family moved to Uitenhage in 1939 and it was here that the Kooverjees made spectacular progress. The family trade was the basis of their success ‘and the family broke into ‘the retail trade in 1948 as Kooverjee’s. Shunka Kooverjee was born in Sharay, Dist. Bilimoria, India, in 1900. He died in 1955 in Uitenhage — Cape Province. S42 PALIBEN: daughter of Ranchod Gopal of Port Elizabeth. Educated: Drawer Practising and Weis P.E. Housewife; b. Port Elizabeth. Interests: Indian Music and Literature. Member: Prathna Sabha of Uitenhage. SHS MANILAL, S. Kooverjee: Businessman; b. De Aar. Edu.: Convent — De Aar, Rosedale and Uitenhage. Businessman: Managed Kooverjees Fruiterers from inception, 1940. He was also a Director of Kooverjees Outfitters until 1949. Keen Sportsman. Member: Hindu Mandal of Uitenhage. Died: 2nd February, 1970. Married: Rewaben Pema Bhaga; S 2. S4Yy AMBALAL, Shuka Kooverjee: Businessman; b. 25th July, 1927 at De Aar, Cape Province. Educated: Convent De Aar, Roselane and Drawer College (Uitenhage). Son of Shuka Kooverjee. Origin: Sharay, District Bilimoria, India. First entered business scene, 1940. Was in the shoe repair field. Established Kooverjee’s 1948. Entered present premises, 1959. Leading family outfitters. Activities: Member: Hindu Mandal, Uitenhage; Member: Bharat Sports Club. Connected with the Divine Life Society, Uitenhage area. Interested in religious upliftment on non- sectarian basis. Rec.: Tennis and Swimming. Married: Parvatiben, daughter of Ranchod Gopal of Port Elizabeth. Bus. Add.: 88 Durban Street, Uitenhage; Phone: 24618. Res. Add.: 88 Durban Street, Uitenhage; Phone: 24618. sus REWABEN: daughter of Pema Bhaga, Maitland. b. Mait- land, Cape Province. Educated: Maitland School and Salt River, Cape Province. Interests: Embroidery and Litera- ture. Member: Prathna Sabha of Uitenhage. 34¢G Born in- Mauritius, A. Govindsamy Pillay, father of Krishnan, arrived in South Africa in 1890 and settled in the Donkey Camp area in Pretoria. He later moved to the Asiatic Bazaar where the family resides to this day. A pious man, A. G. Pillay devoted his life to the Pretoria temple. He was active in the early vernacular education of the Tamil community and encouraged the continuation of Tamil Drama, Garbha and Maypole ceremonies and dances conducted by V. A. Nayagar. He was connected with the Fund raising efforts for the Tamil School buildings. He traded as a greengrocer in the Roberts Heights area for many years and later as a Gunny bag dealer. Died: 1950. se) PILLAY, Archiemaal: Businesswoman. b. Durban. Public spirited. Donated site to the Pretoria A. B. Mariaman Temple. Erected Prayer Hall opposite sanatorium. Was prominent in Fund Collecting — Temple and Festival Activities. Gave selfless service to community. A Vice President of the Pretoria Indian Womens Association. Hostess to numerous dignitaries: Sastri; K. Reddy; Radha Krishnan; K. Maharaj amongst others. S¢e? KRISHNAN, G.: Priest and Busi- nessman. b. 1901, Estcourt, Natal. Educated: Pretoria Col. School; S.M.H. High School; Shiyali, India (1914/22). Director of Tip Top Printers and Publishers, Pretoria. Known for his part in the develop- ment and building of Pretoria’s Indian Temple Hall and Tower (of interest to thousands of visitors). Other Activities: Principal and Priest: Temple V. School and Pretoria Mariaman Temple. A. ; member of various Cultural, Reli- gious and Educational bodies, throughout South Africa. Playright and Dramatist. Presented numerous Plays and Concerts to the community over the years. Connected with various local and other fund raising efforts. Was an active member and Past Joint Treasurer: Transvaal Indian Congress; Was Chairman: Bengal Relief Fund; Treasurer: Pretoria Tamil League Crematorium Chapel, Community. Married: Seethaluxmi Nagamuthoo; $ 1;D 1. Add.: 352-6th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria, Transvaal.

---

## Page 13

172 SEY LAHER, Ebrahim Hassan: Businessman; b. 17th Decem- ber, 1932, Alipur, District Surat, India. Educated: St. Marks — Port Elizabeth and Waterval Islamic Institute. Son of Hassan K. Laher. Arrived in South Africa, 1945. Was associated with family business — Laher’s Store, Port Elizabeth. Established — Africa House, Grahamstown - 1959. General Merchants. Drapers and Outfitters. Activities: Member: Muslim Educational Institute, Alipur Muslim Trust, Albany Museum. Travel: India, Pakistan, and East Africa, P. E. Africa, Zambia and Rhodesia. Married: Miriam, daughter of M. E. Bhettay of Port Elizabeth. Bus. Add.: 23 High Street, Grahamstown. Phone: 2734. Res. Add.: 21 High Street, Grahamstown, Phone: 3492. sso LAKHI, Ahmed A.K.: Businessman. b. 17th October, 1936, Greytown, Natal. Educated: Greytown Primary and Sastri College. Son of A.K.M. Lakhi. Origin: Panoli, Dist. Broach, India. Joined family concern — Melgrey Whole- salers — 1957. Is a Director of Melgrey & Mhlangane Stores. Interested in local activities and was a Member of the Greytown Local Affairs Committee (1968/69). Other Activities: Greytown Tennis Club; Committee Member: Greytown Mosque and Madressa Trust; Secretary: Grey- town Indian Literature Society; Member: Greytown Local Affairs Committee; Rec.: Fishing, Sngling and Tennis. Married: Fathima, daughter of E. Bismillah of Potchef- stroom; S-; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 164; Phone: 164. Res. Add.: 19 Bell Street, Greytown, Phone: 201. es} LALBEHARI, Harilal Rambhujjon: Insurance Agent. b. 25th April, 1925, Temple Valley, Verulam, Natal. Edu.: Verulam Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Rambhujjon Lalbiharee of T. Valley and grandson of Lallbeharee of U.P., India. Is a leading Insurance Agent — African Life Society of South Africa. Is a Director of Retail business — Ballasure of Verulam. Active in several Educational, Religious and Social bodies. Other Activities: Founder and Treasurer: Shree Gopalali Sunday Service; Committee Member: Shree Gopalall Temple Trust; Member: Indian Child Welfare Society (Verulam Branch); Talwant Singh School Fund; F.O.S.A.; Vice President: Temple F.C.; Treasurer: Temple S.C.; T. Valley and Clairwood Civic Association; Member: Verulam Indian Ratepayers Asso.; Sports: Soccer; Rec.: Music, Travel, Hunting. Married: Hanuwathi Devi Ramjewan of Isinembe; S$ 1; D 4. Bus Add.: 10a Temple Chambers, Moss Street, Verulam. Phone: 98. Res. Add.: T. Valley, Verulam, Phone: 98. SS2 LALLOO, K.: Businessman. Commissioner of Oaths. b. 11th October, 1908, Pietermaritzburg. Educated: Clair- wood and Sastri College. Origin: Balia, U-P., India. Joined teaching profession, 1925. One of first teachers at Mere- bank. Leading public figure. Has been connected with almost every Sports, Educational, Social, Cultural and Political activity in the Merebank area. Activities: Past Trustee: Merebank Sanathan Dharma Sabha; Vice President and Trustee: Shri Sanathan Dharma Sabha (Natal) ;Grantee: Sanathan Govt. Aided School; Vice President and Coun- cillor: Hindi Maha Sabha; Vice President: Hindi Shiksa THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO Sangh South Africa. Was in the fore-front against expro- priation measures by Durban City Council — Merebank Area. Donated site to Durban LC.W.S., 1940. Laid foundation stone -— Reunion Bhajan Mandal. Keen supporter of local sports bodies. Has presented numerous trophies. Widely travelled — U.K., Europe, Far Easc, M.E., India, Canada and the U.S.A. Married: Jasodha G. H. Dass; S 2; D 4. Bus. and Res. Add.: 11 Simla Road, Merebank, Natal — Phone: 879876. B53 LATIB, Noor Mohamed “Lord” Hajee Osman: Business- man. b. 25th December, 1913. Educated: India. Son of Hajee Osman Latib. Origin: Bombay, India. Leading fishing tackle manufacturers in the Republic. Popularly known as Anglers Den. Interests: Travel, Electronics and Eng. Sports: Angling and Boating. Bus. Add.: 50a Commissioner Street, Johannesburg, Phone: 8341467. Res. Add.: 3873 Willow Street, Lenasia, Johannesburg, Transvaal. €S4¢ LAWRENCE, John Horace: N.T.D., B.A. (Honours — English); b. 26th Februarv, 1931, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: Methodist Govt. Aided School, Woodlands High School, Springfield Teachers Training College. Son of Mathew Lawrence. Origin: Madras, India. Joined teaching profession, 1949 — Methodist Govt. Aided School. Trans. Nizamia Woodlands High, 1953/58; Orient High, 1959; Umgeni State Aided School, 1960; Manilal Valjee1961, First promotion — E. P. Moodley (1962), Cliffdale (1964), Richmond 1967. Appointed to Department of Informa- tion (Indian Information Officer), 1969. Is connected with Public Relations — Indian Community — Department of Information of Indian Affairs. Other Activities: Sports- master: Methodist Govt. Aided School (1950/61); Lay Preacher: Methodist Church, Local Preachers Rep.: Natal — Methodist Church of South Africa (Pietermaritzburg) Branch; Scouts: Magnus Rover Crew, Pietermaritzburg; Scouts M.: Methodist Govt. Aided School; Lecturer: New Mathematics Indian Teachers. Is now back in the teaching profession; Soccer: Y. Col., Crusaders F/C. Married: Mercia, daughter of Late Mr. Surjoo Parsad of P. M. Burg. Res. Add.: 242 Bodmin Road, Allandale, P. M. Burg. 3s LAXMIDAS, Naran: Tailor, b. 1898, Bardoli, India. Educated: Bardoli. Son of Laxmidas Gopal. Arrived in South Africa, 1916. Entered into Partnership with brother in 1917 — Trading as Hira Lala. At dissolution of business in 1938 was in charge of the firm of Parbhoo Kalian — Merchant Tailors. After a year in Springs as Bhagu Muljee, establish own business in Sauer Street in 1941. Is now living in semi-retire- ment in Fordsburg. Activities: Member: Transvaal Darjee Mandal. Travel: Has visited India on numerous occasions. P.E.A. and East Africa. Married: Maniben, daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. Bhoola Darjee; S 4;D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 42315, Fordsburg, Johannesburg; Res. Add.: 7a Bree Street, Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Transvaal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The K. Lala Family of Middelburg The first of the family, Lala Bhana, arrived here before the Boer War and settled in Pretoria. He moved to Middleburg in 1940. He was born in Dahbel, India in 1882. He died in 1962 at the age of eighty. SSG LALA, Kassan: Businessman. b. 1st April, 1907 at Dahbel, India. Educated: Dahbel, India. Son of Late Lala Bhana. Origin: Dahbel, India. First arrived in South Africa in 1923. Established own business, 1946 — K. Lala; K. L. Fruiterers came about in 1950, leading Indian fruiterers in area. Contri- buted generously to all deserving causes. Religiously —_ inclined. Travel: India (1929 and 1962); E.A.; P.E.A.; Member: Middleburg Hindu Samaj. Keen on all sports Married: Lakhiben; S 5; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 264, Middleburg — Phone: 419;Res. Add.: 27 Verdoorm Street, Middleburg — Phone: 419. MAGANLAL, K. Lala: Basinestcaak b. 16th August, 1931 at Middleburg, Transvaal. Educated: Middleburg Govt. School. Eldest son of K. Lala of Middleburg. Director: Magnarcha Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. “— Fruiterers. Activities: Trustee: Middleburg Hindu Samaj; Married: Paravathi, daughter of Parbhoo Kalan of Boksburg; S 4; D 1. Interests: All Sports; Travel: India (1950). es¢y NARAN, K. Lala: b. 5th October, 1932, Middleburg - Transvaal. Educated: Middleburg Govt. School. Second son of K. Lala. Connected with Magnarcha Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. — Fruiterers. Married: Ramaben, daughter of Parsot Morar of Johannesburg (Newclare). Interests: All Sports — Karati and Judo. Travel: Swaziland, E.A., P.E.A., India and Japan. 3Sq CHANGANLAL, K. Lala: b. 21st May, 1934 at Middle- burg. Third son of K. Lala. Director: Magnarcha Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. — Fruiterers. Married: Maniben, daughter of Narsi Laia of Newclare, Johannesburg. Activities: Secre- tary: Middleburg Hindu Samaj; Committee Member: Middleburg Indian Community; Treasurer: Middleburg Tennis Association. Interests: Cricket and Tennis. Travel: Zambia, Rhodesia, Malawi, Swaziland, P.E.A., E.A. 173

---

## Page 14

174 HE K HEHEHE DEERE HE HE IK ECO The first of the Latifs of Zeerust arrived in this country in 1898 landing in Lourenco Marques and then continuing to Middleburg - ; where he settled. It was here that om he established his first business. aC i During the First World War he moved to Zeerust and after a few years he entered into partnership 4 with A. C. Gani & Company. The ee 3 partnership was dissolved in 1934 mA = and in 1935, the firm of A. ae Latif & Company was established. The eldest son of Aboo Latif, Moosa, joined his father in this venture. The firm progress- ed over the years and in 1944, the business entered the wholesale field, covering the Western Transvaal and Botswana. The business is now a proprietory Company since 1942 and the remaining sons of Aboo Latif, Ismail, Ahmed. and Omar are all Directors in the present business. Aboo Latif was a deeply religious figure in the district in the district and took a keen interest in all Educational, Religious and Cultural activities in Zeerust. He was well versed in Gujarati, having studied in India in his early years. He was born in Bhanvad in 1884. He died in 1953 at the age of sixty nine. SCL MOOSA, Aboo Latif: Director of Companies; b. 15th October, 1915 at Bhanvad, India. Educated: Bhanvad, India. Son of Aboo Latif. Entered business scene, 1934. A. Latif & Co.— General Retailers. Established Wholesale business under the same name, 1944. One of leading General Wholesale business in the W. Tvl. and covering - Botswana. Travel: M.E., Haj, 1968, Pakistan and African countries. Activities: Vice President: Zeerust Muslim Community; Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Rec.: Keen on all sports. Married: Zubeida, daughter of Cassim Jooma of Standerton; S 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 44, Zeerust — Phone 36; Res. Add.: Zeerust, Asiatic Bazaar — Phone: 36. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO J The Aboo Latif Family of Zeerust HE HE ETE HEHE EE EEK 4 IEEE FE I HEHE BE II HOE HE SOE I BEI HE EE HB BK EEE ieee ett tts bets tee ttt tet tet tt Le Ltt tt toe beet bE SES Bol ISMAIL: b. 20th December, 1920, at Bhanvad, India. Educated: Zee- rust. Second son of Aboo Latif. Director: Burger Textile & Co. and A. Latif & Co. of Zeerust. Married: Mariam, daughter of N. M. Dada of Lichtenburg; S$ 2;D 1. Interests: Cricket and Tennis. Former Sec- tary: Zeerust Sports Club. Arrived in South Africa in 1929. G3 AHMED: Businessman; b. 22nd August, 1928, at Bhanvad, India. Educated: Zeerust. Third son of Aboo Latif. Director: A. Latif & Co. of Zeerust: Chief buyer — Groceries and Hardware. Married: Rabia, daughter of Hoosen Ayob of Louis Trichardt; S$ 2; D 1. Interests: Angling, Tennis, Travel. Travel: India, U.K., Europe, M.E., and African countries. Arrived in South Africa, 1929. SG OMAR: Businessman: b. 12th February, 1930, Zeerust. Edu.: Zeerust. Fourth son of Aboo Latif. Director: A. Latif & Co. — Sales Manager. Married: Halima, daugh- ter of Joosub Carrim of Potchef- stroom. D 4; Interests: All sports. Travel: India and Pakistan, Afr- can countries. Interested in all activities. Tennis, Cricket, Soccer, — Zeerust Sports Club. ~ SGS THE SOUTHERN AFRICA sea oe” WHO 175 bs 7a LAZARUS, Arthur Dawson: b. if 14th January, 1903, Durban, Natal. Educated: Fort Hare. Qualifications: B.A. (Maj. English and Psychology); N.T.S.C. Apptd. to staff of Sastri College, Durban. Senior Latin Master, 1931. Apptd. Principal Primary School — 1949. First Indian Princinat — Sastri College, 1950. Transferred Loram High, 1963. Awarded Carnegie Fellowship Yale Uni- versity Graduate School, U.S.A., 1937. Worked in Departments of Education ‘and Race Relations gained Master’s Degree in former. Worked under Dr. C.T. Loram, Professor of Education at Yale and Director of Race Relations. Field work, Master’s Degree under tutelage of Dr. Loram among underpriveteged peoples of Puerto Rico, Santa Domingo and Haiti. Master’s Thesis “Racial Determinants of an Immigrant Group”. Joint Member, 1937 - Joint Seminar conducted at Yale and University of North Carolina. Elected President: Nata) Indian Teachers’ Society, 1951. President for seventeen consecutive years. Conceived and launched present S.A.LT.A. of which he is President Emeritus. Ph.D. (Honoris Causa) conferred by the University of Natal, 1960, in recognition of services to education. First and only non-White to have been so honoured by a South African university. Member: M.L. Suitan Technical College Council. Given a grant by U.S. Government under the Fullbright and Smith Mund Acts —~ Worked at Advanced International Studies, John Hopkins University, Washington D.C. under Professor Vernon McKay, Chairman Graduate Seminar, Afri- can Studies. Also investigated State University system of U.S. Lecture and Study programme by Conference Board of Associated Research Councils, Washington D.C., at Negro Universities in Virginia and Kentucky, as well as at Oxford College for Women, Oxford, Ohio; Kent State University; University of Michigan; U.V.L.A., Los Angles, and the University of North Carolina. Attended as Frater- nal Delegate — Convention of the California Teacher Associations, Los Angles, 1962. Del. to Light U.S. National Commission of UNESCO, Boston, Mass., 1961. Del. to Conf. of International Education — University of Wis- consin ~ under its auspices at Madison, Wis., 1962. National V/P: S.A. Institute of Race Relations (also served on National and reg. Executives). Has written numerous articles and is currently working on a Text Book for the teaching of Latin at High School, an outcome of experi- ments carried out at Loram High, Durban. Is planning a book on Indians in South Africa. Interested in language study. Has working knowledge of at least seven languages besides. English. Chairman: Board of Directors: N.I.T.S. Investments Ltd. Married: D 1. Res. Add.: 1— 4th Ave., Isipingo Beach, Natal. LOONAT, Ebrahim Amodjee: Businessman. b. 1907, Alipur, District Balsar, India. Educated: Private Studies. Son of Amodjee Adamjee Loonat. First entered business scene, 1925 Loonat’s Store (1930); Subway Silk Bazaar (1930) and Loonat Wholesalers (1962) in Jeppe — Johannesburg. Donated land for the Rainbow Mosque and Provided Madressa for community. Has been an office bearer of almost every Muslim Cultural and Religious body in Alipur and Johannesburg as Patron, President, Trustee and Treasurer over the years. Rec.: Soccer, Tennis and Angling, Travel: Has visited almost every country in the world. Bus. Add.: 298 Main Street, Jeppe, Johannesburg — Phone: 243071. Res. Add.: 14 Harold Street, Roodepoort, Johannesburg Phone: 7632531. 86) LORGAT, Hassan: Sales Manager; b. 8th October, 1937. Delmas, Transvaal. Educated: Krugersdorp Primary and Johannesburg High School. Son of Late Fakir Lorgat of Springs, Transvaal. Sales Manager of Central Cash Store — Burgershoop, Krugersdorp. Joined firm in 1955. Rose to present position over the years. Interested in focal activities. Sports: Soccer and Tennis. Married: Fathima, daughter of Late Ismail Navsa of Bedfordview, Transvaal. Res. Add.: Anarkali Street, Azadville, Krugersdorp, Tvi. BGR LOCKHAT, Ahmed, Mahomed. B: 7th Oct., 1946, Durban. Edu: St. Anthony’s, Kathiawad, Sastri College & Mc Gill University, Montreal, Canada. B. Com., CG. A. (3rd year.) S/s/o. Mahomed A. Lockhat of Dbn. Was connected with large international Organisa- tion as assistant Manager & Accountant of one of subsidiaries 1970/71. Joined family concern - Lockhat Bros. & Co. (Pty) Ltd., Dbn. - 1972. Assistant Manager. Director - Lockhat Group of Co’s. Also connected with Lockhat Charitable Trust, Ahmediya Mosque & Madressa. Past Sec. / Treas.: Mc Gill Islamic Students’ Society. Takes a keen interest in Sports, Swimming, Soccer, Squash & Ice Skating. M: Amina Ismail M. Paruk of Dbn.S.1. Bus. Add.: 104 Commercial Rd. Dbn. Phone: 23992. Res. 100 Commercial Rd., Dbn. i “THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO” Make use of them. j advertising pages reach men at the top. i i @ ce ec YI DS - D P HP HO 9 A > HY Pa I RO

---

## Page 15

176 The THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO R. M. Lodhia Family of Durban =o *) LODHIA, Mohanlal Kanjee: b. 1890, Keshod, Saurastra, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1908, Retired Jeweller and Merchant. Pioneer. Retired in 1945. Established Lodhia & Sons 1936. Interests: Education, Religion and Literature. Well-known throughout South Africa. S10 LODHIA, Mohanlal Ramdass: Manufacturing Jeweller and Merchant. b. 28th September, 1919, Durban, Natal. Educated: Carlisle Street and Sastri College, Durban. Son of Mohanlal K. Lodhia. Was Director — Lodhia & Sons — established 1936. Now Sole Proprietor. Leading Jewellers. Agents: Favre Leuba watches, Other Activities: - Chairman: Mahatma Gandhi Statue & Bursary Trust (S.D.S., Ladysmith). Instru- mental in bringing Mr. C.C. Desai — Member of Parliament, India, for unveiling of Mahatma Gandhi statue at Ladysmith, Natal. Presented Mahatma Gandhi Medallions to State President in Cape Town to cOmmemorate occasion. Responsible for statue making arrangements in India by Madhubhai Patel. Originator: “Truth & non-Violence” inscription on pedestal of statue as suggested by Late Prime Minister of India, Shri Lal Bahadur Sashtri. Chairman: Lodhia Educational’ and Scholarship Trust. Also connected with numerous other Social and Cultural bodies. Director: Lodson Investments; Janpat Holdings (Pty.) Ltd.; Luminous Heights (Pty.) Ltd.; Overheight Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Has travelled extensively ; Married: Kikiben (Nirmala) Pragjeebhai Desai; S 3; D 4. Bus. Add.: 118 Grey Street, Durban (Lodson House); Phone: 27208. Res. Add.: 374 Brickfield Road, Durban, Natal. $7) LODHIA, Nirmala K. R.: House- _ wife. b. 25th September, 1926. ” Wife of Ramdass Mohanlal Lodhia. Educated: Vernacular. Teaching profession — Gujarati 1946/71. Associated with Surat Educational Society. Instrumental in the pro- motion of various Social, Cultural and Educational Activities. Daughter of Late Pragjee Desai and Mrs. Desai of Asherville, Durban. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 177 The Madhavijee Family of Pretoria VTZ MADHAVSJEE Bhoja arrived in this country in 1897 after a short period in Portuguese East Africa and settled in Pretoria. It was here that he established the first of his shoe repair businesses. Some years following the Boer War, after two short trips to India, he returned to this country with two of his sons, followed by a third in 1919. He was back in India in 1921 and died two years later at Raval at the age of 45. The family con- tinued as shoe repairers until 1931 when Valjee Madhavjee branched out into the retail trade to be followed by Kalyan in 1936 with another retail store in Prinsloo Street. From 1938 onwards the sons of Bhoja launched out on their own under the names K & V Madhavjee. CTY} VALJEE, Madhavjee: Director of Companies. B. 25th December 1909, Raval, Saurastra, India. Edu: — Pretoria Indian High School. Was connected with family business — M. Bhoja: Established V. Madhavjee 1936, under partnership. Dissolu- tion — 1938. Prop. V. Madhavjee. Other Acts: Chairman: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj School Board. P/Chair: & Patron: & V/C: Pretoria Kshatriya Mandal. Was Trustee: Pretoria Hindu Seva ‘Samaj. Interested in all Social, Cultural & Public Acts. Married: Ratanben D. Kara. S 3; D 5S. Bus. Add: 274 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. Phone: 25972. Res. Add: 203 Fourth Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 35174. uy, G , i a KALYAN, Popatlal: Businessman. B: 31st May, 1936, Raval, Saurastra, India. Edu: St. Xaviers, Ahmeda- bad, India. Diploma - English. Poly-Tech., Ahmedabad, India. M: Savita Gokal Bhima. Sis KALYAN, Jivan: Director of Com- panies. B: 28th September, 1929., Raval, Saurastra, India. Edu: Pre- toria Indian High School. Business- man. Joined family business of K. Madhavjee & Sons since 1954, under partnership. Other Acts: Sec: Shree Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Treasurer: S.A. Kshatriya Mandal; Pretoria I.C.W. Society. Member: Laudium Primary School Education Committee: V/C: Pre- toria. Kshatriya Mandal; P/Chair- man: Navyyug Mandal. Sec: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj School Board and the Pretoria Kshatriya Mandal. Mem: Laudium Consultative Comm. V/C: Laudium Rate Payers Assoc. Director: K. Madhavjee' & Sons, Bhagvanjee Bros., Fine Art Printers, Swaziland Consortium. Sports: Tennis. M: Mangla. K. Gohil Clerkter. S 4; D 2. Bus. Add: 260 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. Phone: 31488. Res: 238—6th Street, Laudium, Pretoria. Phone: 794666. 4 ” MADHAVJEE, Narotam Valjee: B: 26th March, 1935, Pretoria. Edu: St. Xaviers High & Gujerati University (B.Sc. & Elec. Eng.). Joined family business — V. Mad- \ havjee — 1963. Chairman: Navyuga ~— Kshatriya Mandal; P/Comm. Mem: <= S.A. Ksjatriya Mandal — Education Trust. Sports: Tennis. M: Vasanti- ben M. Ranjee. S 2. Bus. Add: 274 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. Phone: 25972. Res: 203-—4th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Ph: 35174. S76 KALYAN, Girdharlal: Business- man. B: 20th April. 1933, Pretoria. Edu: Kilnerton Institution. Second son of Late K. Madhavjee. Acts: Auditor: Navyug Mandal & Shree Pretoria Kshatriya Mandal. M: Madhuri A. Bhagatjee. $75 KALYAN, Ramniklal: Born: 11th December, 1944. Edu- cated at St. Xaviers, Ahmedabad, India. Interested in all sports.

---

## Page 16

178 The Baldeo (Tiwarie) Family BoP ‘ of Plessislaer BALDEO Maharaj arrived in this country during the Boer War and settled in the Underberg area where he worked for alocal farmer. In the shadow of the Drakensberg mountains he found things much different from the life he had led in his native village, Bhainsaha in the United Provinces, India. It was bitterly cold in winter and there was a time when the farm was cut off for days. Snow blanketed the country for miles around during this period. There is a curious tale attached to Baldeo’s early days when as a boy he roamed his native surroundings. At the age of 8 he fell violently ill and it was during this feverish state that a Sadhu called home for the usual act of charity. Baldeo’s mother looked distraught and the effects of days of sleep- less nights showed plainly on her face. The Sadhu asked her if there was anything wrong at home. Upon learning of the cause of her haggard appearance the Sadhu knelt at Baldeo’s bedside and felt his pulse. Even in that unconscious state, Baldeo heard the Sadhu say that the fever would subside and he would speedily recover. Then the Sadhu THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO insisted on reading Baldeo’s palm. The words of the Sadhu stuck indelibly in Baldeo’s mind. “Your son,” he told Baldeo’s mother, “will leave you at the age of 21 fora far country. At 18 he will have made up his mind to go away”. The Sadhu’s words uttered 13 years earlier proved true. At the age of 21 Baldeo left for South Africa. MAHARAJ, Sheobally: Businessman. B: 1917, Newadi, Natal. Educ: Lidgetton & Sastri College. Eldest son of Baldeo Maharaj. Acts: P/(Mem: Advisory Board — Local Health Committee; F/Mem: Indian Ratepayers Assoc.; Treas: Mt. Partridge Arya Samaj. Established Gary’s Cafe - 1954. M: Bhagwandaye Sooknandan. S$ 5; D 4. Bus. Add: Box 42, Plessislaer. Res: Plessislaer. 2 MAHARAJ, Beare Farmer & Hindu Priest. B: 5th June, 1923, Impendhle, Natal. Edu: Newadi School. Son of Batdeo Maharaj of Boston. Origin: (Bahas Bareli) Bajia, U/P, India. Farming in the New Hanover area. Also practicing Hindi priest. Scholar in Hindi language. Formerly farming in the Boston area. Acts: Mem: Pentrich Vedic Pracharak Sabha. M: Ramdoolarie. Daughter of Supath Maharaj of Lions River. S 5; D 2; Rec: Study of Hindi Scripture, Music. Bus. Add: Khan Rd., Raisethorp, — P.M.B. SES MAHARAJ, Bhojduth Beharie. Public Bookkeeper. B: 9th Novem- ber, 1926. P.M.B. Ntl. Edu: St, Anthonys, E.P.S., Woodlands Hgh. Fourth son of-Late Tewarie R.B. Maharaj of P.M-.B.. Origin: Ranipur U/P, India. Public Bookkeeper, Ins. Agent & Land Estate Agent since 1946. Took over father’s bus. 54 - R.B. Maharaj & Sons. (Estab. 1920) Other acts: P.M.B. Agent: British American Ass. Co.; S.A. Eagle Ins. Co.; Marine & Trade. Was Founder & Chairman of Lanitashire F/C (P.M.B:) Auditor: Pentrich & Campsdrift Ratepayers Asso. (1965/9);Treas: Vedic Vidya Pracharak Sabha (1965/9); :°V/P: Veda Dharma Sahba — 1949/69. P.M.B. County F/A (1952/60). Was active soccerite & cricketer: Stella F/C, M.I.C.C. & Higher Grade C/C. M: Batchee. Grand-daughter of Rughbeer Banya of Greytown. S 3;D 1. Bus. Add: 453 Church Street, P.M.B. Phone: 21777. Res: 18 Manning Avenue, Mountain Rise, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Phone: 20244. 33 MAHARAJ, paltoniba Ramothar “Baal”. Leather Worker. B: Sth May, 1928, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Son of Roma- thar Maharaj. Sports: Cricket: M-1.C.C. (1942 - at age of 14) 49 N.O. vs Orientals, Rep. P.M.B. - 1947/8/9. Rep. Eddels Indian vs Whites 1947/9 Selected to Rep. Natal 1. vs Cape Malays at Durban 1949. Ret. ill health premature. Rep. Cricket. Continued League Cricket ~ 1942/60.H/S 89. Was member of Victorious P.M.B. X1 to break Durban’s strangle-hold in Intertown fixtures (1949). High scoring opening Batsman. Was Chair: Ramola Darts Club & Sel. — Darts Union, P.M.B. Sec: M.I.C.C.; Soccer: Hillview F/C; Mem: Raisethorpe Ratepayers Association. Bus. Add: 35 Simeon Road, Pietermaritzburg. (Northdale). Res. 35 Simeon Road, Northdale Natal. “es MAHARAJ, Harrichand: Businessman. B: Ist June, 1920, Table Mountain, P.M.Burg, Natal. Edu: St. Anthonys, E.P.S. & Higher Grade. Son of Gujadar Maharaj. Origin: Lucknow, U.P., India. Was associated with family business — wattle bark & transport — up to 1942. Former garage owner, Wood & Coal Merchant. Building trade in 1948 — H.M. Builders One of few qualified Indian plumbers in the country. Acts: Takes a keen interest in all communal acts. Mem: Raisethorpe Ind. Ratepayers Assoc: Rec: Soccer & Angling. Married: Consalia Ramesar Maharaj of Port Shepstone. § 1. Bus. Add: 42 Simeon Rd., Raisethorpe, P.M.Burg. Phone 41120. Res: Simeon Road, Raisethorpe P.M.Burg. Phone 41120. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 179 SEE SER EO ESOS CRS SEN SRE HA HE IK PO RK DOE EH HOE 3 HOE 3 BE HE HEE DOESOR ED IE ES” The Pundit Dwarika Maharaj Family of Stanger PEILERE DEI HEHE JAI ILIA HRD IH BIEBER EE EE SS BS I I IB RE FEE IK I HE HE HH HE IK REE EM WS HE IEE EIA HE MEE IEE SEWSHURING Doobay was the first of the Maharaj family to arrive in this country in 1875. Little is known of his activities but he was undoubtedly a talented man and well versed in Sanskrit and Hindi. His third son was Dwarika who was born at Emona in 1884 and became a pupil of Jeawon who had just opened his first school at Fairbreeze. He followed in his father’s footsteps as a man of letters and became a priest — the title of Pundit was attained in 1910. He began farming on teased land at Demona near Darnall. He played a leading part in the establishment of the Vedharam Sabha and the Sabha Temple in 1910 as well as in the founding of the school at Nanot-i. The school was established in 1920 and the Rampartals, the Parags and the Parmeshwars also played a leading part in the founding of the Nanoti S.A. School. First Chairman of the Nanoti School Board and the Vedharam Sabha, he played a leading role in the educa- tional, social and religious activities of his community in the area. He was also one of the earliest members of the Sanathan Dharma Sabha of Natal. He died in 1960 at the age of 76. Fam. Add: Temple Grove, Stanger, Natal. 5G ee] s MAHARAJ, Gayapursad: Hindu Priest. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & Stanger High School. Interests: Religious, Social & Educational Acts. Residence: Merebank, Durban. S8t MAHARAJ, Mohanpursad: Vice-Principal. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti, Clairwood High School & Natal University. Began teaching career in 1940. Also practicing priest. €B9 MAHARAS, Nundkissore: Vice-Ptincipal. B: 24th March, 1925. Ed: Nonoti, Greyville & Sastri College & U.N.LS.A. Joined Teaching profession in 1945. Vice-Principal — Stanger High. Toured U.K., Europe, India & Ceylon. Married: Dakwanthee S.J. Maharaj. S 2;D 1. £10 MAHARAJ, Rabbikissoon: B: Nonoti, Ed: Nonoti & U.N.LS.A. (B.A.). Also practicing Hindu Pirest. ei MAHARAJ, Sivasunker: Businessman. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & External. Business brains of family. Controls Maharaj Holdings in Cartage, Garage, Retail, Sand & Stone. 392 MAHARAJ, Soogreen: Teacher. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & External U.N.I.S.A. 893 MAHARAJ, Parmesar: Businessman. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & Stanger High School. Manages Sunrise Fruiterers. Joined Family business in 1954. S4y MAHARAJ, Sumindernath: Teacher. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & Stanger High School & U.N.I.S.A. 89¢ MAHARAJ, Athmanand: Teacher. B: Nonoti. Ed: Nonoti & Stanger High School, Springfield & U.N.LS.A.

---

## Page 17

180 $16 MAHARAJ, Beharee Athmanand. Attorney-at-Law. B: 17th July, 1916. Pietermaritzburg. Edu: St. Anthonys Sch., P.M.B., Sastri & University of Natal, Wits University. Graduate: B.A. (Unisa) Son of R.B. Maharaj. Origin: Ayodiya, U.P., India. Practising at Stanger since 1961. Previously at Dbn. & P.M.Burg. Admitted to the Side Bar, 1944. Comm. Mem- & Sec.: Natal. Ind. Congress. (P.M.Burg Branch), Ex. Mem.: S.A.° Ind. Congress. Foundation Mem: Natal Ind. Congress; Sec./Treas: Durban First Aid Service Battalion (1940); Past Sec.: Natal Uni- versity College Students Union (1938/41); Com. Mem: Durban Ind. Tech. Edu. Comm. (1940/41); Council Mem.: Natal Ind. Football Assoc. (1947/52); Chair.: Natal Soccer Appeal Board (1947); Council Mem: P.M. Burg Ind. Foot- ball Assoc. (1946/48). On deputation to Central Govt. at Pretoria (Gen. Smuts) 1945; S.A. Ind. Congress (1947). Ex. Member.: S.A. Ind. Congress (1946/47); Publisher & Co-Ed.: “The Searchlight” (Ind. Nat. Weekly); Mem: Natal Passive Resistance Council (1946); Patron: P.M.Burg Inter- Race Soccer Board (1947/8); “Leader of Opposition & Prime Minister” - Maritzburg Ind. Parliament (1949); Pres: P.M.Burg & Dist. Football Assoc.; Com. Mem: Veda Dharma Sahba (1953); Rep. to Liberal Party (P.M.Burg Branch) First Nat. Conference at Jhb. (1954); Natal Del. Ind. F.A. to S.A.F.A., (1950/3); Councillor $.A. Soccer Fed.; on dep. - Soccer Fed. to S.A. Soccer Assoc. for recog- nition at Fed. Internationale de Football Assoc. (1953). THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO M. Lilawathie Soshila Maharaj. S 2; D 1. Bus. Add: 86 Couper Street. Phone: 480. Res: 5 Victory Road, Stanger. 397 MAHARAJ, Dhevpersadh Sooraj- lal. Teacher. Senior Assistant. B: 18th Jan., 1918, Dannhauser, Natal Edu: Private Study & Dann- hauser Ind. School. Son of Sooraj- ial Maharaj. Origin: Lucknow, Ind. Joined teaching prof. 1944/51, Dannhauser. Trans. St. Oswalds High. 1952/61, S-E Vawda (62/68) Lennoxton, 1969. Travel: P.E.A. Swaziland & Botswana. Has lec- tured on languages and religions of India and Works of Tagore to White: audiences over the years. One of i the first Indian Local Secretary - appointed by Depart. of Edu. Arts & Sciences to conduct national exams. Acts: P/Pres. & Sec: N.I.F.A. Served on S.A. Soccer Assoc.; Del. to S.A. Soccer Fed.; P/Sec. & Treas: Newcastle Ind. Cricket Union; P/Pres. Dannhauser Tennis Club. Connected with various sports clubs & Assoc. Chair: Newcastle Branch — S.A.1.T.A.; Mem: St. Oswalds Edu. Com., Org. Sec. — Festival of Soil & Republic Festi- vals 1966., Newcastle Cent. Com. (1964). Mem.: Exec. Council — S.A.I.T.A. Travel: Zambia, Rhodesia. Rec: Cricket & Tennis. Hobby: Philately & Photography. M: Subhadra, daughter of Late Mr. C. Maharaj of Newcastle. Address: 231 Kies Avenue, Reservoir Hills, Durban. FE HE HK HE HE HE HE NE IE EE 81% The first of this branch of the MAHARAJS arrived in | South Africa in the 80’s and settled on the North Coast where after the period of indenture, he joined the South African Police. During the Bambata Rebellion he saw Service in the Greytown area with the South African Police and some years later, established a trading store in ‘the Tugela Ferry area. Frank Maharaj was the fourth son of Silal Maharaj and was born in Greytown in 1900. Mine- i: Worker and finally mechanic, he opened his own garage in Wasbank in 1929 as Wasbank Motors. Public spirited. he- took an active part in every local activity. He was a trustee of the school and Chairman of the Indian Advisory Board and the School Society. YOLK YOK30E HOEHOEHO HE 90, HOEHEEHE NOE 3 30 HOEHE HOHE IE HOENOEHOEHE HOEHOHE HE BO HOHE HEHE I HE HEHE NN HH NI I I SRSA TY I SA IIB II BI id The Frank Maharaj Family of Wasbank HA TA HA KE KEKE EIEN KE HE HOEHOEHOEHOEHOENOEHOEHOEHEHEHE NEE ESE KEHOE XE NE NE NOE HOEKE HOEHE SO I NE HO I EE EE YOR TEIN HOE EE HOCH EOE EJ NEI JOD ED pistes 3333-4 $4 299 ERROL, Frank Maharaj: Businessman. B: 31st July, 1937, at Wasbank, Natal. Ed: Wasbank, Newcastle School, Lady- smith & Clairwood Indian High School. Son of Frnak Sewlall Maharaj. Origin: Lucknow, India. Acts:) Mem: Wasbank Indian Advisory Board, Wasbank Ind. School Society. Rec: Cricket & Soccer. Married: ‘Roshni N.D. Singh. S 3; D 1. Bus. Add: Box 3, Wasbank. Phone: 3, Res: Ralfe Street, Wasbank. Phone: 23. Died 1973. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Hiraman Maraj Family It is not cnowk lien the first of the Hiraman MARAJ family landed in South Africa. It is clear though that Shree Vidya Upadyah Sharma arrived somewhere in the 60’s and was amongst the first arrivals. He was an intellectual and was one of the first of the Pundits in this country. It is unfortunate that Shree Vidyah Sharma did not live long and neither did his son, Chanderdhooj, who died in his twenties in 1909, leaving behind young Hiraman who was then three-years-old. Chanderhooj Sharma became a priest, as was the family tradition and officiated at many functions and weddings in this country. He left behind two sons; the eldest was Hiraman. Hiraman was born at New Guelderland on the 15th of August 1906. At an early age he took over the management of his uncle’s store at New Guelderland and after six years there the Malaria epidemic on the North Coast forced him to leave and he settled in Durban. Here he rana Taxi service to Pietermaritzburg and Stanger. In 1939 he fell ill and the family moved to Stanger and began a bus service to Doornkop which was the beginning of the family’s first steps in this direction. He was a keen sportsman and held many official posts in local sports bodies. He died at the age of $7 in 1953. JI RISHIDEV, H. Maharaj: Teacher. B: 23rd July, 1929, at Pietermaritzburg. Ed: Stanger Indian Secondary School & Sastri College. Qualifications: N.T. Diploma & N.T.S.A. Eldest son of Hiraman Maharaj of Stanger. Teaching profession — 20 years. First appointed in 1950. Taught at various schools. Has business interests in family concern — Doomkop Bus Services. Interests: Religion, Philosophy, Psychology. Active in Drama and Debtaing. Sports: Soccerite and Cricketer. Married: Rambawathee R.T. Maharaj. S 4; D 2. Res: Tinley Manor. WS ; BRIDGEDHAW, Maraj; Director. B: [2th December, 1938, at Durban. Ed: Stanger High School. Youngest son of Hiraman Maraj. Director in family business ~ Doornkop Bus Service. Manager of business. Transport Section. Acts: P. Sec: Lower Tugela Darts Union. Rec: Angling, Literature. Married: Anna Peters. S 1;D 2. Bus Add: 219 Rood Street, Stanger. Phone 105 Stanger. Res: 1 Elizabeth . Road, Stanger, Natal. 187

---

## Page 18

Nanan: Businessman. B: 15th July, dysmith G.J. School, St. Pauls & Eldest son of Nanan Maharaj of d soccerite and cricketer. Mem. of an out- f P.M.B. Played for Juveniles — F.C. (1949/52) Rep. P.M.B. in MAHARAJ, Ishwarlal 1935, P.M.B. Edu: La Woodlands High School P.M.Burg. Gifte standing sporting family ©. Hillview, Techs, Natalians both Juvenile and Junior ran (1952). Rep. N Captained Natal Sen! race fixtures. Club; \Natalian Frontiers F.C. (County F.A. er/Fast Bowler. X1. 1950/52. Was a Mem. of Eddels Ind. atal Under-21, four consecutive years — 1954. Senior ranks - 1956. Played in Inter- s - 1956/68. Sunday League, and Leg Spinn for Inter-town THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The K. P. Maharaj Family of Raisethorpe KARANDHAW, , Parsad, Maharaj: Farmer & Businessman. B: 26th July, 1924, Howick, Natal. Ed: Esther Payne & St. Pauls. Son of Ramantar (Murli). Origin: Bargaon, Gonda, Fyzabad, India. Joint contributor — Baijoo & Maharaj School & contributor to T-P.A. & M.L. Sultan Technical College. Donates Annual Xmas Dinner (Aryan Benevolent Home — P.M.B.) for last 16 years. Trustee Hindi Circle; Trustee: Hindi Pracharak Sabha; Com. Mem: Baijoo Maharaj School Education Committee; Office Bearer: Various other Religious, Cultural & Educational bodies. Rec: Keen fisherman. M: Rajkumarie Sohan Singh, D 3; S 2. Bus. Add: 774 Greytown Road, Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg. RAMANTAR, son of Murli, arrived in this country in 1903 and was the first of the family to arrive here. He settled in Howick and was indentured to the Ball family who farmed in the area. Well versed in Hindi scripture, he also officiated as priest in the district and in Pentrich where he settled later. He was one of the early businessmen in the Pentrich area and ran a retail store there until his death in 1935. He was born in 1883 at Bargaom,’Fyzabad, U.P., India. qe o7 ks. Sel. for Natal under-21 ); Cricket: Agressive bat R.H. Mem. of the M.I.C.C. Sel. AOR, q04 q MAHARAJ, Pooran Sewpersad: Insurance Consultant and Land & Estate Financial & General Agent. B: 25th Dec., 1927, Stanger, Natal. Edu: Stanger Ind. Govt. School. M.L. Sultan Tech. College. Son of Late Mr. & Mrs. S. Maharaj of Stanger. Director of Companies; Maharaj’s Cash Stores; Maharaj’s Taxis. Rep.: Dominion Ins. Co., Marine & Trade, Union & National Ins. Co., Chairman F.0.S.A. (Lot 14 — Local Com.). Org. & Chair: Fishing Comp. 1967. Council Mem., Chair: Local Com.,1.C.W.S. (Lot 14); Chair: Lot 14 (Cheer Group); Chair: Finance Com. I.C.W.S.; Hon. Aud. & Mem: Stanger Indian Ratepayers Assoc. Rec: Fishing, camping, boxing, wrestling, motor races. Bus. Add: 48 Couper St., Stanger. Phone: Crescent & Victory Street, Stanger. 62 Stanger. Res: Cnr. Hill X1. vs Europeans Annual Fixture. vs Coloureds 1950/2 . Keen on boxing. Rec: Gardening. Other Acts: Was Treas: & Delegate: M.LC.C. to M.D.LC.U; V.P.: Northdale Sanathan Vedic D. Sabha. Estab. Dry Cleaning Plant. De-luxe Dry Cleaners (1967). M: piggies daughter of B.B. Maharaj of Van Reenen. S 2;D . Bus. Add: 526 Church Street, Pietermaritzburg; Res: 16 Nulliah Road, Northdale, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. GoG MAHARAJ, Haripersadh Ramothar: Leather Worker — -atefag Pane ee B: 1921 P.M.Busg, Natal. Edu: E.P.S. Son of Ramothar Maharaj. Acts: Mem: Cricket — M.I-C.C. Soccer: Hillview F.C., Standards F.C. (County). P/Mem: Raisethorpe Ratepayers ‘Association; Tres: Katrina Welfare Fund, Katrina Sports Club. Sports: Soccer, Cricket Married: Ramdhei, daughter of Mrs. Surjoo Maharaj of Lennoxton, Newcastle. S 3;D1. Bus. Add: Box 628, P.M.B. Res: 35 Simeon Road, Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg. qos MAHARAJ, Paramanand Sewharuk: Profession: Photo- grapher. B: 27th December, 1927, Durban, Natal. Edu: Braemer G.A. Indian School. Son of Seehraig Maharaj of Inverugie. P.O. Esperanza, Natal. Prof. Photographer to sole prop. of “The Cavalcade” Studio, Verulam (1950). First prof. Photographic Studio in Verulam. Acts: P/Mem: Verulam Indian Ratepayers Assoc.; Health & Strength Lg. of S.A. Physioculturist and ex-Amateur Boxer (L/Weight). Res. in Verulam since 1950. Keen interest in all communal and social affairs. Rec: Phetogiaphy. Bus. Add: 35 Moss St., Verulam. Phone: 146. Res: 54 Russom St. Phone: 140. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 183 The Lalla Maharaj Family AIO MAHARAJ, Sunker Lalla: b: 1876, Cawnpore, India. Ed: Vernacular (Sanskrit & Hindi). Retired. Stu- dent of the Vedas and staunch follower of the Sanathan faith. Settled in Doornkop near Stanger. Acts: One of founders of S.D.S. in Natal. Laid foundation stone — Divine Life Society -— New Germany Road on behalf of S.D.S. Natal. Actively connected with the Durban Hindi Temple and other religious bodies. Keen supporter of various Charitable, Cultural and Religious Organisations. Travel: India 1947, 1950 and 1956, and East Africa. Res: Reservoir Hills, Durban. rea] LY MAHARAJ, Krishna Lalla: Businessman. B: Ist Feb., 1913, Durban, Natal. Ed: Mayville, Carlisle Street, Sastri College. Son of Pundit Lalla Mahataj. Origin: Canpore, U.P., India. Joined $.L. Maharaj & Sons 1928. Established own business 1944, K.L. Maharaj -— Fresh Produce Merchants (W/Sale & Retail). Is an active figure in the Cultural and Religious Groups of the city and province. One of founders of S.D.S. in Natal and a Trustee of the Sanathan D. Sabha and the Durban Hindi Temple. Travel: India and East African Territories. Acts: Was Sec. and now Pres: Shree Sanathan Dharma Sabha -- Natal; Chair: Durban Early Morning Market Stall Holders Assoc.; Sec: Durban City Market Buyers Assoc,; V.P. S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha. Rec: Literature and Indian Classical Music. M: Suminthra, daughter of Balkaran Tewarie of Durban. S 7; D 3. Bus. Add: 38/40 Etna Lane, Durban. 236/239 Squatters Market, Warwick Avenue, Durban. Phone: 23572, 348950. Res. Add: 248 Bellair Road, Mayville, Durban. Phone: 884335. qi2 au MAHARAJ, Saminath Ramnarian: Farmer. B: 1900, Black- burn, Verulam Distr. Natal. Edu: St. Aidans, Durban. Eldest son of Saminath Maharaj of Durban Point and Basti Jilla, U.P. India. One of the early pioneers in the Cliffdale area. Settled in the early 30’s. Was instrumental in bringing first early settlers to Cliffdale. Obtained land grant from the Kingham family for Indian education at Cliffdale. Was communally active in Educational, Cultural and Religious fields. Was Trustee and Treasurer of the Cliffdale Indian Welfare Society (1953 onwards). First Chair: Vediya Pracharnee Sabha (formed in 1934). Married Athwarie, daughter of Roopnarian Maharaj of Sydenham, Durban. S 5; D 2. Bus. Add: P.O. Cliffdale, Natal. Res: Cliffdale, ‘“Sterkspruit Farm”. 13 MAHARAJ, Sewchall Stanley: Businessman and Clothing Mnfr. B: 2nd February, 1919, Nonoti, Darnall, Natal. Edu: Depot Road School and Sastri College. Son of Karanand Maharaj of Durban. Manufacturer of Clothing, Ottawa, Natal. Director — Flash Clothing Mnfrs. since 1950. Pioneers in manufacture of jeans. Takes keen interest in welfare of community in Ottawa. Ex. S.A. Tennis Cham- pion for 12 years. Natal Champ. 17 years; Holds-tennis record for J . length of time as champion. Rec: Tennis. Active member in all social acts. Married Umee Nagin Jeena. $3;D 2. Bus. Add: P.O. Ottawa. Phone: 1731 Verulam. Res: Maharaj Road, Ottawa, Natal. MAHARAJ, Sewsunker Surjoo: Principal and Chairman L.A.C. B: 15th June, 1922, Bellair, Dbn. Edu: Seaview School and Sastri College, University of S.A. Ext. B.A. Son of Surjoo Maharaj of S/View and Hurdoijila, near Caron- pore, India. Began teaching at Wyld Memorial in (Inanda) 1942. Was appointed to Umgeni school on full-time basis in 1943 and then to Fairbreeze. Trans. to Depot Rd. School, 1946. Promoted V.P. — S.K. Reddy School, Durban in “1 ae 1956. Transf. to Clare Ville 1959 and on to Verulam High in 1963. Appointed Principal at Illovo School in 1964. Principal of Dundee High School from July 1964. Takes a keen interest in all local matters. Was appointed to first L.A. Com. by administrator - in - Exec. in 1966 and elected Chairman of L.A.C. Re-elected for another 2 years; 1967/9. Other Acts: Mem. F.O.S.A.; Ramakrishna Centre; Dundee Indian Ratepayers Assoc. Chair: I.C.W. Soc. (Dundee); S.A. Indian Teachers Assoc. (Dundee Branch); Treas: Dundee Tennis Club. Rec: Soccer, cricket, tennis. Married: Leela, daughter of S.R. Maharaj of Sydenham, Durban. S 1; D 2. Bus. Add: Box 107, Dundee. Phone: 174. Res: 28a, Bulwer Street, Dundee.

---

## Page 19

184 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO REDE JAE IAL 3OU OEE 200 OE SOE IEEE EEE ECE EA EE ARE CH 3 DE 2 3 3 9 9 90 . bal Ll mt Le} Fed Fl ® Led Gd cd The Pundit Ramnath Maharaj Family TBE I0E DOEDEDEDE 98E NEE IOC NOERAIL IEEE IE IAI DI NOEHEIR ISN HHH 3 HE 3S 3 9 BBS BSS SE 2 9 9 3 2 9 EME REE MEK NE EERE EE Alw Fifteen years after the arrival of the first Indian immigrants, Ram- nath Maharaj, then only 18-years- old, settled in the Tongaat area, where he was attached to the Saunders family who were then a long way off their present position as the leading sugar barons of our times. Ramnath Maharaj was one of the few early intellectuals to arrive in Natal. He did not come to this country willingly. It is reported that he was décoyed and shipped here, but once in Natal, he served his term of indenture and branched out into those fields in which the Brahmin in him were more suited. His intellectual bearing and early training as a man of letters fitted him more to the administrative rather than the labourer of the fields and as Sirdar, served the Saunders well. At a time when Hindu priests were hard to come by, Ramaath Maharaj served his community in their spiritual needs and he was known throughout Natal as a result of his religious activities. He was one of the early Faith Healers in this country and was renowned for his healing powers. Towards the latter part of the century he opened his first retail business; one at Elandskop and another at Edendale. Respected and esteemed by his community he was an acknowledged leader in the Religious and Cultural activities of the early Indians. He maintained his link with the homeland by regular and protracted correspondence. He was responsible for the training and graduation of many a young Hindu Priest and it was due entirely to men like Ramnath Maharaj that religious and cultural links with the Indian Homeland were retained. He was born in the village of Parthabghoo in the Antaman district, not far from Manipur in the United Provinces, India. He died in 1968 at the age of 111. AWNe GANGAPERSAD, Maharaj: Born, and Educated in Pietermaritzburg. Second son of Pundit Ramnath Maharaj of P.M.Burg. — Pioneer (1875/1968). Established his own business in 1940. Was previously with the family businesses at Siyamu & Edendale. Also farmer; &- Dairy-man. Director — Maharaj’s Motor Transport and Edendale Funeral Furnishers (First Indian concern to cater for Government Pauper Burials). Public-spirited. Acts: Held various important posts in Cultural, Religious & Social Organisations in the P.M.B. area. Has donated considerably to deserving causes over the years. Married: Jankie, daughter of Gajadhar Maharaj of Pietermaritzburg. S 2;D 2. Bus. Add: Box 23, Edendale, Natal. Phone: 25955. Res: Edendale Main Road, Edendale. Phone: 25955. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 185 THE MAHARAJ FAMILY Continued .. . Vie RAMNARAIN, Maharaj: Born in 1928 at Edendale, P.M.Burg. Ed: Sutherlands Government Aid. Ind School, P.M.Burg. Tech. Institute Matriculated — externally. Quali- fied as Pundit. Eldest son of Gangapersad Maharaj. Shop assist- ant and Insurance agent. Priest and businessman — Edendale Funeral Furnishers (1940/55). Acts: Mem. Ramakrishna Study Circle, Deepa- : | vali Cheer Committee (Edendale) and various religious and cultural bodies in Edendale area. Was a keen angler and sportsman. Died 1955, at the age of 27~ survived by wife, Brasnathee, daughter of Jugesar Maharaj of Avoca, Natal. D 1. i 418 RAMSAROOP, Maharaj: Born on 10th March, 1930 at Edendale, P.M.Burg. Ed: Sutherlands Govt. Aided Indian School, P.M.Burg. Second son of Gangapersad Maharaj. Origin: Pathabghao, U.P. India. Joined family business in 1960. Was previously with S.A.P. (1948/60). Instrumental in estab- lishing transport business in 1962 - Maharaj’s Motor Transport. Keen student of religion. Interested in all Cultural acts. Acts: Com. Mem. Cliffdale Kali Temple, Edendale Deepavali Committee; Ex. Com. Mem. Edendale Indian Cemetery Committee. Rec: Soccer, Angling. Married: Seetha, daughter of T.T. Nath of Pietermaritzburg, Natal. S$ 2;D3.Bus. Add: Box 23, Edendale, Natal. Phone: 25955. Res: Edendale Main Road, Edendale, Natal. Phone: 25955. HOE DOE HE 29EIOL IEE IE NOEDHE OE HOEHA HENLE HE HEEHOEIE NE HOE NOLSE NE SOLD NEES OE HOE I NOEHOE EHS RE HOE 3 ESE IE SOE 3 ESE 32063 3 3065 EE 3 90963 0 9 I EOE of Tolligate DOE IRE HOEIE IE HOEHEE IE BE HOEHOE HE HE NOE BE A AEE BH NE HOEIA HE HE 30 HE HK KIO HM HE HE 3 HEE HOE 3 HE HEE HE HOEBA HK HOEOE BH HEB BL HOE ED HHL DK 3 He OED HE HO IE HK OE 9 IE The Mahabeer Family e 414 The Mahabeer family traces its history from the first arrival, Mansa, who came here in 1887. He was accom- panied by his father, Mungray Mansa. He was one of the few Hindi speaking intellectuals to arrive in this country. He arrived at about the same time as Swami Bawani Dayal with whom he had a long association in the Hindi news- paper field. Both men were instrumental in starting the Saraswathi Press in the Brighton Beach area. They pioneered the first newspaper — the “Dharma Vira”. They were Hindi teachers, a rare breed in those early days, and their activities also covered the social and religious fields. The press and its activities did much to mould the thinking of the Hindi speaking in this country. Rajkoomar was the second son of Mansa and from an early age took a leading role in the affairs of the family. He was educated in English and in the vernacular. In 1941 he set up a furniture manufacturing concern in Isipingo as Rex Furniture **> \ufacturers. The Saxon Printing Press was also one of his ventures. He took a leading part in many Social, Cultural and Religious organisations and their activities. Widely travelled, he went overseas in 1959 visiting India, Pakistan, Ceylon and Kashmir. He also toured many African countries. beet iss 3s $3 2.4 920 MAHABEER, Devraj: Managing Director. B: 7th May, 1932 at Tollgate, Durban. Edu: St. Aidans, St. Oswalds (Newcastle) and Sastri College. Managing Director of Saxon Furniture Manufacturers — Established in 1949. Became partner in 1954. Outstanding athlete - Sastri Coll. Natal 100 yards champion - 1950/1. Rep. Natal 1949/52 at S.A. Championships. Rep. College at cricket and soccer. Other Acts: Sec. Avondale Athletic & Cycle Clun; Sec. & Treas: Natal Amateur Athletic Club; Mem. F.O.S.A., Aryan Benevolent Home — Durban, Natal Furniture Mnfrs. Assoc. Graduate I.C.C.l. — Natal. Married: Ambika, daughter of F. Sathiapal of Pietermaritzburg. Bus. Add: Old Main Road, Isipingo. Phone 91638. Res: 57 Chancellor Road, Tollgate, Durban. Phone: 888518.

---

## Page 20

q2} MAHARAJ, Sookdeo Ramnath: Bookkeeper. B: 25th November, 1920. Dannhauser, Natal. Edu: Dannhauser Govt. Aided School. Son of Ramnat Maharaj. Began as Bookkeeper at the age of 16. Was associated with various firms — now attached to Dannhauser Motors since 1965. Acts: Nominated to L.A.C. — Dannhauser in 1967. One of first nominees. Sec.: Dannhauser Indian Ratepayers Assoc. D.I. Chamber of Commerce; Treas: N. Natal Angling Asso. Also holds posts in social, cultural and religious bodies. Rec: Angling, soccer and cricket. Married: Devarani, daughter of Raghuraj Singh. Bus. Add: P.O. Box 63, Dannhauser. Phone: 56. Res. Add: Main Road, Dannhauser. A MAHABEER, Mothee N: Businessman. B: 16th October, 1923,-Inanda, Natal. Edu: Inanda Govt. Aid. Ind. Sch. Served early apprenticeship in the distributive trade. Was employed in the retail trade at Groutville and in Durban. In May 1965, opened own Gen. Dealers business, trading as Goodluck Supply Stores — 64 Bond Street, Durban. Acts: Mem. Shri Krishna Temple (Westville); Natal Indian Blind Society. Married: Bisson Devi. S 3; D 3. Bus. Add. 64 Bond Street, Durban. Phone: 22623. Res. House 30, Road 406, Chatsworth. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 423 MAHATEY, Hoosain Allie: Director of Companies. Born Sth May, 1918, Makhjan, Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Edu: Zonnebloem College, Ratnagiri H.S., Bhave H.S. (Poona) and Bombay University. Son of Allie Mohaiydeen, Origin: Makhjan, India. Was connected with the Bengal Famine Relief as Treasurer (1953). Was keen volley ball player and active cricketer. First entered business scene in 1936 — family concern — Mohaiydeen & Co. Estab. dairy business — Princess Dairy — 1950; Dry Cleaning — Super Speed — 1958. Acts: Treas. Cape Muslim Circle; Sec. Young Kokani Muslim Society (Cape); S.A. Kokanie Muslim League; W/Sec. Group Areas Deliberations - Indian Community. Trustee: Schotsekloof Muslim School. Also Trustee: Al Ahazar Mosque - Cape Town; Exec. Mem. Habibia Edu. Inst.; P.R.O.: Ryltands Civic Association. Rec: Boxing, motor-racing, cricket, gardening. Married: Zuleika, daughter of A. Kader of Kimberley. S 3; D 2. Bus. Add: Athlone Ind. Township, off Hens Rd., Athlone, C.P. Phone: 63466. Res: 71 Raveenscraig Rd., Walmer Estate, Cape Town. Phone: 551281. W224, MAHATEY, Ismail Shaik Hoosain: Businessman. Born on 10th January, 1925, Dabhat, Ratnagiri District, India. Edu: Prestwich and Trafalgar High. Son of Shaik Hoosain Mahatey. First retail business 1941 — S. Adam & Co. Estab. first of Dry Cleaning establishments — 1963 as Grand Dry Cleaners; X-pert — 1969; Merlin — 1969. One of the leading Dry Cleaning organisations in the Peninsula. Travel: M/E., India, Pakistan, Japan and the Far East. Active in various cultural and educational bodies in Cape Town and India. Rec: Soccer. Bus. Add: 98 Halt Rd., Elsies Rivier, Cape Town. Phone: 985605. q2S B: 16th January, 1933, P.M.Burg, Natal. Edu: St. Pauls, Woodlands, Springfield & U.N.LS.A. (B.A.) (4th year). Son of S. Maikoo of P.M.B. Began teaching career in 1955 at St. Pauls (P.M.B.) Subse quently at Woodlands (1963/4); Promoted to V.P. in July 1964 at Islamia (P.M.B.); Transferred to Ramatha S.I. School, 1967. Was founder and first Chair. Woodlands O.B. Club; Founder and First Capt. Woodlands O.B.C.C. Com. Mem. Allendale Ratepayers Assoc. Was also connected with the P.M.B. Tech. Students Soc. and Official of the Woodlands Sports Comm. Was active soccerite and cricketer. Rep. School and Midlands at Inter-Zone Athletics. Rec: Soccer & Angling. Married: Sarojini, daughter of M.C. Naidoo of P.M.B. S 2. Bus. Add Ramatha S.J. School, Northdale, P.M.B. Phone: 41762. Res: 3 Bodmin Road, Allandale, P.M.Burg. Phone: 20495. MAIKOO, Ishwarlal: Vice-Principal 426 MATHER, Cassim Amod, Business- man. B: 15th February, 1925, at Stanger, Natal. Edu: Stanger Govt. Indian School. Son of Amod Moosa Mather of Stanger. Origin: Kathor District, Surat, India. Owns one of the most up-to-date and modern Dry Cleaning establishments on the North Coast. P/Manager: Stanger Garage & Filling Station for un- broken 27 years. Director: Quick Service Dry Cleaners, Stanger. Investor in properties. Activities: L/Mem. & Chair. Muslim Sunnee Congregation; Comm. Mem. Stgr. Ratepayers Assoc., M.L. Sultan Tech. Coll. Advisory Bd. Stanger Edu. Board; Stanger High School Golden Jubilee Comm.; Past Trustee: Stanger Anjuman Madressa. Mem.: L.A.C.; H.L.V.P.; L.T. Soccer Fed. & Stanger Sports Gr. Assoc. Keen soccerite and cricketer in early days. Married:- Fathima Kathrada of Verulam. S 2; D 1. Bus. Add: 30 Couper Street. Phone 210. Res: Couper St. Phone: 210. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO BS 5:5 3-3 2 3 5 $-3- 3-9 x EEL EEE Le eee Sees eee LeEeee renee eee e eer t ee ert ETT TT TT TT TTT TTT The V. N. Mohamed Family of Durban te LLL ELLE et Lt see ss tg ech srt geaep pe Stet R Tra itp erp a aT 36 A HE IE HOENESE ET HOE 3 HOE DE 303 9k 3 3k I OE, NOORMAHOMED Alli was the first of the family to settle in this country. He arrived here in 1894 and some six years later established a General Dealer business in Durban. The timber trade drew his interest for some time and in 1934, he opened the Prince Service Station in Prince Edward Street, Durban. He also broke into the Property Market. Over the years, he took a keen interest in local and Jodiya affairs. He was born in Jodiya, Kathiawad, 187 x bel x nt x Es 3 E3 5 I Wea India, in 1882. Gz MOHAMED, Valli Noor: Business- man. Born in 1906 in Durban. Third son of Noor Mahomed Alli. Educated: Carlisle Street, Durban Entered Business scene at an early age. Established own business as Timber Merchant in 1926. Was also in the Fruit Box Manufactur- ing field. Other activities: Past President of the Natal Memon Association. Trustee: Juma Musjid Trust. Is at the moment in charge of the Unit 2 Mosque building project at Chatsworth. Interested in all local and Jodiya community affairs. Director: V.N. Mahomed Investments (Pty) Ltd., Milo Service Station (Pty) Ltd., Jodiya Investments. Married. Has 10 sons and 2 daughters. Bus. Add: 4 Kismet Arcade, 75 Prince Edward Street, Durban. Phone: 29722. Res. Add: 168 Posselt Drive, La Mercy, Natal. Phone: 64 Desainagar. 4320 MOHAMED, Ahmed Valli Noor. Businessman. Born on the 1st of March, 1928, in Durban. Director: V.N. Mohamed Inv. (Pty) Ltd., Milo Service Station (Pty) Ltd. Interested in all local activities. Married: Zubeida I.V.M. Jooma. Has 2 Sons and 6 Daughters. Address: 167 Posselt Drive, La Mercy, Natal. 424 MOHAMED, Yunus Ahmed V.N.: Businessman. Born on the 23rd December, 1945 at Durban. Educated at Orient High and Primary. Joined family concern — A.V. Mohamed ~ at an early age. Now Manager of Milo Service Station in Tongaat. Was previously with Jhavery Shoe Extension. Past Member.: D’Alberton Callies Sporting Club. Inter ested in all sports and cultural activities. Married: Mariam; Has 2 daughters. Bus. Add: P.O. Box 94, Tongaat, Natal. Phone: 132 Tongaat; Res: Posselt Drive, La Mercy, Natal. Phone: 34 Desainagar. GX MOHAMED, Yusuf Ahmed V.N.: Businessman. Born Ist December, 1947, Mayville, Durban. Educated: Anjuman Islam and Orient High. Joined family business — A.V. Mohamed — 1965. Now General Manager of Milo Service Station, Tongaat, Ntl. Was with Kingsgate pata Clothing until 1969. Interested in aw local and Durban Youth activities. Se, Member of Y.M.M.A. Married: be Shahida E.V. Mahomed. One son. ay Address: Ridge Street, Tongaat & Posselt Drive, La Mercy, Natal. Phone: 132 Tongaat.

---

## Page 21

188 Gq Br MAJID, Suleman Ebrahim: Businessman. B: Hekpoort, Tvl. Educated: Pretoria North Indian School. Son of Ebrahim Majid. Origin: Jalalpur, India. Took over Bird’s Store — General Merchants — 1941. One of the most progressive businessmen in Hekpoort district. Local agent for Electro- lux and Laurel Paraffin. Was an active member of sports bodies in the Pretoria North district up to 1941. Takes an interest in all local matters. Rec: Soccer, cricket. Married: Mariam, daughter of Late Ismail Fakir of Stanger. D 3. Bus. Add: Box 79 Hekpoort; Phone: 2503. Res: Hekpoort, Western Transvaal. 433 MAKAN, Bhana Parbhoo: Director of Companies. B: 15th September, 1915, Sadadval, India. Edu: Sadad- val, India and Dawer School, P.E. Son of Makan Bhana. Joined the family concern — Makan Bhana — 1941. Is a director of the firm and has interests in numerous other subsidiary companies. Acts: Trust: Gujerati Kshatriya Mandal — P.E. Was an active mem. of the cricket X1. Rec: Soccer & Cricket. Trvl: U.K., Europe, Far East, India, Rhodesia and Portuguese E. Africa Married: Maniben, daughter of Shiba Kanjeé of Kosh, India. S 2;D 3. Bus. Add: Box 365, Port Elizabeth. Phone: 41453. Res: Malabar Township. P.E. MAKANJEE, Dayaljee Haribhai: Businessman. B: 24th February, 1917, P.M.Burg, Natal. Edu: Woodlands High School & Sastri College. Son of Haribhai Makanjee of P.M.B. and Navsari, District, Surat, India. Was previously with the firm of Bombay Bazaars — Durban. Established own business in 1946. Trading as Market Trading Co. Is sole Distributing Agent for Caltex Oil (Africa) Ltd. Is interested in all acts. Isa Com. Mem. Surat Hindu Assoc.; Patron: Overport Social Club, Rangers F. Club; Member: F.0.S.A., Overport Care Committee. Rec: Tennis, travel, Married: Ruxmanie, daughter of Vanmally Parsotham Mistry of Navsari, S 3; D 4. Bus. Add: 149 Brook Street, Durban. Phone: 27926. Res: 280 West Road, Overport, Durban. Phone: 884740. 92S MAMDOO, Ismail Mohamed: Insurance Agent. B: 11th May, 1921, Rander, India. Edu: Bree Street, G. School; E.T.C., Jhb. Son of Hajee Mohammed Mumdoo. Arrived in South Africa in 1930. Was in the Fresh Produce field for a number of years as manager. Branched out into insurance 1949 — Mnfrs. Life Ins. Co. Also reps. Guardian Assoc. Co. (S.A.) Ltd. Awarded Int. Quality Award — Life Ins. Agency Management Asso. Holder of various Certs. of Merit over the years. Other Acts: Patron of various sports clubs over the years; Sec: Randerian Miabhai Bene- volent Soc.; Chair and Mem: Vrededorp Boys School Edu. Com.; V.C.: Lenasia State High School (No. 2); Com. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Mem. Page View Ind. Traders Assoc. Also interested in all religious and cultural acts of the Muslim Comm. Rec: Soccer, Indian Classical Music & Travel. Married: Zuleika, daughter of Mrs. & the Late A. Rangrage. S 3; D 3. Bus. Add: 4th Floor, Glencairn Buildings, Cnr. Market & Eloff Streets, Johannesburg. Phone: 283300; Res: 3829 Statice Street, Extension 3, Lenasia. Phone: 355928. ABC MANDHAI, Suleman Cassim: Businessman — Retired. B: 17th February, 1922, Pietermaritzburg. Edu: St. Anthonys Methodist & P.M.Burg. Technical College. Son of Cassim Mandhai. Origin: Poor- bander, India. Tennis: Began play- ing League Tennis in 194] — United Tennis Club — Natal Lg. & Knockout; Natal Champion — — Dundee Open Tournament & P.M.B. Inter-race Doubles Champ; Club Singles & Doubles Champ. Captained United Tennis Club; 1950 Natal Champs League; Natal Knockout Cup (1950/1); Ntl. Champ. Pritheepaul Champs : 1952 (Singles & Doubles); Played soccer, cricket and table tennis — United T. & C. Clubs. Was Prop. Honeydew Fruiterers, P.M.Burg. Previously — Ismail’s Fruit Bazaar, Pietermaritz Street. Acts: Was Treas: United Soc. Club, © (1943/5); Was Pres. & Sec.: United Table Tennis Club, 1957/62. Rec: Angling. Married: S 5; D 1. Add: 24 Mudray Road, Northdale, Natal. A371 MANICUM, Gopaul: Physical Instructor; Edu: St. Anthonys, Woodlands, Springfield and M.L. Sultan Tech. Coll. B: 19th Septem- ber, 1935, P.M.Burg. Third son of Origin: Madras, Presidency, India. Began teaching career as Locum Tenens. Qualified 1960. Joined staff of Isipingo indian School. Transferred to Raisethorpe High the same year. Took Physical Instructors Course in 1967. Trans. to Woodlands as Physical Ins. 1$6o. Outstanding cricketer. Rep. P.M.B. and Natal at Inter-District and Provincial level from 1958. Offspinner ‘& Batsman. Played against Kenyans. Toured Rhodesias N/Ntl. — 1964, Batting: R/H Batsman. 102N/C vs Tvl. at P.M.B. 1. Club 100 R.A. vs Woodlands. Capt Natal — Int. Prov. — 1971/2. Capt. S.A. X1 vs Easter . Province 1972. Capt. Natal °73. Soccer: School & Club Rep. Training College. Tennis & Table Tennis (Inter-City) — Club. Rec: Music and Literature. Married: Endhravallie, daughter of Rajugopaul Naidoo. S 1. Bus. Add: Woodlands High School, Northdale, P.M.Burg. Res: Berea Cresce. New Holmes, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Ramsamy Manicum of P.M.Burg.” THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 189 HEE RE HE RHEE BR BR BERBER BRR, BIH BRE Fd : The : Malek Family HR SEE EE HL HEHEHE EE HE BH HE BE HEHE HK HK HEH HH HE BI BBA BH BB BBB BA BB BI IE NI BAA BB BBB RB HB BSB 2 2 2 YE Born in Port Louis, Mauritius, in 1894, the youngest son of Karim Mohamed, Ahmed arrived in South Africa in 1911 and settled in Durban. A bookkeeper by profes- sion, he was for some time in Pietermaritzburg but returned to Durban where he eventually settled. He was one of the early pioneers as a commercial traveller and used ] the railroad to advantage in trans- Vv porting his samples from one place to another. He joined one of the leading firms of Wholesalers in the country, the House of Lockhat’s, in 1916, and although now long retired, still maintains a close contact with the firm. Over the years, he developed one of the best runs of any representative in both the Transvaal and Natal and remains, to this day, a popular and welcome figure with his numerous trade contacts throughout the country. He was popularly known as ‘Malekjee’. 434 MALEK, Hashim Rassool: Motor Vehicle Salesman. B: 4th May, 1939, Ladysmith, Natal. Educated: Centenary, Hindu-Tamil, Surat Hindu and M.L.S.T.C. Eldest son of Malik Rassodl. Joined McCarthy Rodway as Workshop Reception- ist in 1960. Is now with Marshall Motors — DATSUN-NISSAN — from 1971. Is fast making his mark in Motor Trade. Keen sportsman. Rec: All Indian music. Travel: India, E.A. & P.E.A. Married: § 1; D 1. Bus. Add: 80 Prince Aufred Street, Durban. Phones: 317886/65446. Res: 67 Esmail Avenue, Parlock, Durban. HX KEKERE IE KE KEKE HE HERE ae) MALEK, Rassool: Motor Vehicle Salesman: Born: 11th November, 1915, Rander, Dist. Surat, India. Educated: Rander and Ladysmith, Natal. Son of Malek A. Karim. Arrived in this country in 1927. Was in Ladysmith up to 1941. Moved to Durban and entered rep. field. Was grounded during War years but retained by his principals, M.S. Randeree & Co., until 1947 when he was back on the road. In 1958, became free- lance and in 1962, entered the Motor Trade as salesman with Mc Carthy Rodway. Popu- larly known by all sections as ‘Karim’, he has now made it a family tradition by the introduction of his sons into the Motor Trade. One of the most successful family group of car and truck salesman in the Republic. Activities: Trustee: Rander Mehfil-iqhlas (Durban). Also its V/Chairman and Com. Mem. (Fund Raising Committee). Travel: India, U.K., Europe and Pakistan. Married: S 6; D1. Bus. Add: 242 Goodhope Centre, 92/96 Queen Street, Durban. P.O. Box 3943 Durban. Phones: 65446/21848. Res: 67 Esmail Ave., Parlock, Durban. Pa G+] MALEK, Mohamed _ Rassool: Motor Vehicle Salesman. Born on 10th August, 1940, Ladysmith, Natal. Edu: Centenary, Anjuman Islam and Surat Hindoo, Durban. Entered Motor Trade — Mc Carthy Rodway — 1961]. Served as Assnt. Foreman up to 1966. Rep. field — mid-1966. One of outstanding Indian Motor Salesmen in the province. Car sales offices — Good- hope Centre. Deals in all types of Motor Vehieles. Managing Director. Activities: Com. Mem. Rander Mehfil-ighlas (Durban). Travel: India and African countries. Married: S 2. Bus. Add: 242 Goodhope Centre, 92/96 Queen Street, Durban. Phones: 65446/21848. Res: 67 Esmail Avenue, Parlock, Durban.

---

## Page 22

190 THE MALEK FAMILY Continued . . MZ MALEK, Rahim (Chota) Rassool: Motor Vehicle Salesman. B: 23rd February, 1943. Durban, Natal. Edu: Centenary, Anjuman Islam and Sastri College (Mat.) Served apprenticeship — Motor Mech. — Kempsters, later with Beachway Motors. Was previously connected with family organisation — Malek- son’s — Motor Brokers. Now with Datcentre Motors (Datsun-Nissan). Was also connected with Anchor Motors and Marshall Motors. Interests: Soccer, swimming and table tennis. Travel: India, P.E.A. table tennis. Travel: India, P-E.A. and Swaziland. Married: $1; D 1. Bus. Add: 192 West Street, Durban. Phones: 314101 /65446. Res: 67 Esmael Avenue, Parlock, Durban THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ee MALEK, Rehman Rassool: Motor Vehicle Salesman. B: 27th July, 1945, Durban, Natal. Edu: Cen- tenary, Anjuman Islam, Orient Islamic and Sastri College Joined Kempster Sedgwick as motor app. in 1965. Spares dept. and rep. from 1969 with Olympic Motors (Toyota & Rambler). Also handles Truck and other divisions. Rec: Soccer; Travel: India, P.E.A. and E.A. Married. S 1. Bus. Add: 142 Berea Road, Durban. Phone: 344512/344820 / 344512/65446. Res: 67 Esmail Ave., Parlock Dbn. ————————————————————— Aetp MANSOOR, Ebrahim Ahmed: Businessman. b. 10th March, 1928, Durban. Educated: Hindu-Tamil Institute and Umzinto (St. Patricks). Son of A. C. Mansoor of Surat, India and Durban, Natal. Originally from Durban — (A. C. Mansoor & Co.) — established in 1939. Moved to Park Rynie Supply Store, catering for holiday trade. Public spirited — contributes to various destitute causes. Activities: Vice Chairman: Park Rynie Indian Retailers Association; Committee Member: Umzinto Ismailia Mos- que and Madressa Trust. Rec.: Swimming and Travel. Married: S 4; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 4, Park Rynie, Phone: 122, Scottburgh, Natal. Res. Add.: Convent Road, Park Rynie — Phone: 122, Scottburgh. ALG MANJOO, Yakoob Essop: Pharma- cist. Born on 17th April, 1935. Colenso, Natal. Educa: Colenso, Ladysmith, Dundee, University College. Keen sportsman. Repre- sented Klip River and Northern Natal at Cricket and Soccer. Other Sports: Tennis and Badmin- ton. Prop. Arcadia Pharmacy, Stanger, Natal. Married: Ayesha M. Mathir. S 1. Bus. Add: 3, Jansoni Arcade, Couper Street, Stanger, Natal. Phone 2. Res.: 8, Asmitha Flat, Couper Street, Stanger, Natal. Phone 2. q¢sS” MANSINGH, Kid: Hotel Manager. B: 10th December, 1920, Durban, Natal. Edu: A.Y.S. Indian School, Mayville, Durban. Son of Ramdeo Singh of Jaunpore, U.P. India and Mayville, Durban and nephew of: Late B.M. Singh of Mayville. Present Hotel Manager - Taj Mahal Hotel - PM.Burg. Ex-boxer. Began am. ranks 1932. Turned prof. 1934 at the age of 18. Long career — 97 undefeated fights in am. ranks. As prof. 38. Went overseas 1942. Joined British Navy same year. Saw action — Mediterranean. Fought for Navy Featherweight & Lightweight Divisions. Demobbed 1945. Was Border Champ. 1946. (E. London). Was winner coveted Boxing Title Belt — Amateur Ranks Ran boxing schools — P.E., E.L., N. Ntl. Was (trainer) Boxing and P.T. Inst. E.L. Fire Brigade of Cape Corps Retired 1953 and made come back 1954. Greatest bouts Congo Kid (twice) 1948. Joined S.A.P. short period. Associated with S.A. Breweries for many years — Hotel Trade. Became Manager - Taj Mahal Hotel - 1962. Married: Mary Delores, daughter of Late Frank Potion of East London. S 2; D 5. Bus. Add: 536 Greytown Road, (Taj Mahal), Raisethorpe, P.M.B. Phone: 23220. Res: Taj Mahal Hotel. HE SE IEE REE RE REIL IK HERE THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 191 3A HA I HE EIEIO I IK HEHEHE IA HAHEI MEN BB BH HEHEHE HEI BA HEH HI BH HE NEU I BB I BBE HE BH HEB BBB HB HI BB BO BE OH BK HE EE GET THAKER, Odhavjee Manjee: Born in 1895 in Bhanvad, India. (Kathiawad). Businessman. Arrival in South Africa - 1906. Founder of Wholesale and Manufacturing business of Victoria Produce Co. Established in 1930. Now 43 years in existence. Contributed to various charities from time to time. Trustee of Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj for many years. a44 MANJEE, Mohanlal Thaker: Wholesale Merchant. Born in 1919 in Durban, Natal. Edu: Sastri College. Old Greyville School. Son of Thaker Manjee Odhavjee. Origin: Bhanvad, India; Played cricket at College and Bharat. Participated in various social and cultural organisations in South t/ ~y Africa between 1940 and 1958. Uf f Travel: U.K., Europe, East Africa, f, ee | India, U.S., Canada. Rec: Travel . and literature. Married: Sarasvati. S 2. Bus. Add: Rear 119 Victoria Street, Durban. Phone: 22518. Res: 133 Victoria St., Don. The Manjee Family of Durban YETI BEI BENE BN BE HEN BEE EH HE BEE EE HE BEN I HEH BH HEH BS NEI HH HN BN BHO HB HO BB BB HEB 9 BH BSB BB BE XE x TE XE KE HE KE RE KE REE KEE BS BHANJEE, Thaker Manjee: Businessman. B: 17th May, 1930. Bhanvad, India. Edu: Greyville School, Sastri College, Durban. Son of Thaker Manjee Odhavjee. Origin: Bhanvad, India. Cricket and soccer for College - Crimsons. Participated in various social and cultural acts: Rec: Cricket, soccer, reading. Married: Jaswanti Golaldas Kalyanji. S 2; D 4. Bus. Add: Rear 119 Victoria Street, Durban. Phone: 22591. Res: Flat 1, 133, Victoria Street. Durban. qq KARSAND, Thaker Manjee: Chartered Accountant. B: 22nd June, 1939, Durban, Natal. Edu: Kathiawad School, Sastri College, University of Natal. Son of Thaker Manjee Odhavjee. Origin: Bhanvad, India. B. Commerce A.C.A. (Eng.), C.A. (S.A.}) A.T.H. (London): Qualified in 1967. Joined Mahomedy & Manjee 1969 — Aud. The firm was initially the first to practice as such in the Republic a Indians. Sports: Cricket an adminton. Married: Kirti daughter of Late Liladhar Kala. Bus. Add: at dentice Centre, 92/96 Queen Street, Durban. Phone 69987 Res: Flat 6, 133 Victoria Street, Durban _ , 9¢ | MAHENDRA, Thaker Manjee Born on 27th September, 1943: Durban, Natal. Edu: Kathiawad School Certificate. Travel: Europe, U.S., Far East, East Africa, Canada. Sports: Married: Damodar Sodha. Bus. Add: Rear 119 Victoria Street, Durban. Phone: 22591. Res: Flat 4, 133 Victoria St., Dbn. Phone: 315004. and M.L.S.T.C. Junior Cricket & Badminton. Shushila, daughter of

---

## Page 23

192 9$2 MASLAMONEY, Anthony Leo: B: 28th June, 1913 at Durban. Ed: St. Anthonys, Clairwood and Higher Grade, Son of Maslamoney. Origin: Trishurapuli, Madras, India. Was a clerk in a Legal office. Settled in East London in 1934/8. Moved to Cape Town same year - catering trade. Active sports leader and businessman over a period as Masla’s Masala. Acts: Founder and Pres: Blue Bells Football Club — East London; Record Clerk, Treas. V.P. and Pres: Western Province Ind. F.A. H.L.V.P. & Delegate: S.A.1.F.A.; Mem. Liquor & Catering Trades. Was also Del. and Exec. Mem. over a period of years. Rec: Soccer and cricket. Married: Cathering, daughter of N. Dhana of Kimberley. S 5; D 1. Bus. Add: 92 Victoria Road, Wood- stock, C.P. Phone: 558034. Res: & Phone: Same as above. 9qs3 MATHIR, Hajee Ismail Mohamed: Textile Mill Technologist. Born on 9th September, 1899 at Newcastle, Natal. Edu: Ladysmith, Natal. Established the first of his busi- ness in Newcastle in 1917. The firm became a Limited Liability Co. in 1932. Founder of Bossomworth Inv. Co. and Mathir’s Cash Store (Pty) Ltd. and various other Co’s. Was gifted with remarkable busi- ness acumen. Had a genius for Engineering. Other Acts.: He was Chairman of the Newcastle Muslim Community for many years and he was initiator of various land and building projects, which has made the Mosque and Madressa an independent unit for the Muslim Community. Donor to Sastri College and almost every deserving cause in the country. Keen sportsman — laid and maintained one of’ the biggest private tennis courts in the Northern Districts. Held various posts in the code. ls now settled in Pakistan. An Industrial Technician. Specialises in Textile Mill Techno- logy. Was connected with one of the leading Textile Mills and is now Independent Technologist. qe *MAYET, Ismail Fakir: Director of Companies. Born: 31st May, 1925, Johannesburg,’ Tvl. Edu: Bree St., Jhb. High and Harvard College. Son of F. Hassan Mayet. Origin: Alipore, Dist. Surat, India; First joined family concern 1945 — F. Hassan. Sports Administrator and Public worker. Was appointed to S.A. Ind. Council — 1st Sept., °68. Serves on various committees of Council. Is also Chairman of the Liaison Com. to the Steering Com. for the Fordsburg Oriental Plaza Project. Acts: Cricket. Treas. Tvl. Cricket Fed.; F.M. Kismet Cricket Club; Manager S.A. Ind. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Cricket X1 (inter-race); Del. Tvl. to S.A. Ind. Cricket Union; Del. Wits to Tvl. Inter-race C. Board; Tvl. I.L. Ten- nis Assoc - Jhb. Ind. Sports Ground Assoc. ; Chair. and F.M. Tvl. Ind. Cricket Umpires Assoc.; P. Chair. Tvl. 1.C.U.; HLL.V.P. - Jhb. Ind. F.A.; Tennis: P.C. Tvl. Ind. L. Tennis Assoc.; S.A. Ind. L. Tennis Assoc.; S.T. L. Tennis Assoc.; Del: Tvl. - Southern Africa L. Tennis Assoc.; Chairman: Nirvana H. School Edu. Com.; P.C. Alipore Muslim Trust; P. Sec. Madressa Himayatul Islam. Sports: Tennis: Orientals L.T. Club, Wesleys L.T. Club. Rep. Tvl. - Inter-Provincial Tournament. One of outstanding public workers in the Transvaal. Married: Hawaboo, daughter of M- AkoobLaher of Johannesburg. S-4; D 2. Bus. Add: 6b, Kort St., Jhb. Phone: 838-7497. Res: 46 Earp Street, Ophirton, Jhb. A5S MAYET, Mohamed _ Saley (Chummy): Director of Co’s and Ins. Consultant. B: 17th October, 1921, Jhb. Edu: Bree Street Govt. Ind. School. Son of Saley Hassan Mayet. Origin: Alipur, India. Was associated with family business — Saley Ebrahim & Co. - 1939/42. Estab. own business — Saley’s Agency (1942). Founder of Saley’s Travel Agency. Has travelled wide- ly. Activities: Exec. Mem. C.LT.; Sec. & Trustee: Jhb. Ind. Sports Ground Assoc.; Sec. & Hon. L.V.P. Tvl. Cricket Fed.; Pres. & H.L.V.P. Wits Cricket Union; One of leading sports administrators and public workers in the Transvaal. Popular figure. Rec: All sports. Bus. Add: 81 Central Road, Fordsburg, Jhb. Phone: 838-4628. Res: 27 Becker Street, Ferreirastown, Johannesburg. Phone: 838-4621. %S6 “MAYET, Suleman Mohamed: Retired Businessman. Born in November, 1895, Kather, Dist. Surat, India. Edu.: Higher Grade. Durban. Public worker for the last 50 years. Was one of the first of the Muslim community to matricu- late in this country. Has been a Trustee of the Juma Musjid Trust for over 40 years. Was in the fore- front of political activity from the Gandhian era. Served on the Exec. Com. of the N.LC.,S.A.LS., N.LA. and was on delegation to various centres over along period. One of Founders, Sec. and Exec. Mem. Darul-yatama Wal-masa- quin, Durban. Exec. Mem. Durban Indian Blind Society; Com. Mem. Durban Indian Child Welfare Soc.; Is a Trustee of various family trusts in Natal. Past Sec. Pine Street and Leopold Street Madressas. In Kathor affairs, he has organ- ised various Mosque and Madressa funds serving both Kathor and Kholvad and the M.B. Mayet and Bai Awanboo Trust today caters for all sections of the community for higher education. He was in the thick of Congress freedom activities in India for a number of years and also in the Khilafat movement. Widely travelled. Bus. Add: P.O. Box 520, Durban. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 193 HEPC RRC RR HR RRR ER BRERA R HM HHH A 3 & * x : The Master Famil : e ster aly : z 4 : of Johannesburg : METTET TCE ETETE ETE CTT TTTECET ECE ET ER ORC Cet Liictctabaastaadintalatsestmsutmammesil As) The first member of this well- known family to arrive in this country was Ukabhai Premabhai, who settled in the Transvaal in 1896. He was in Krugersdorp for a number of years and eventually moved to Johannesburg. He traded in fruit and vegetables but the carpentry trade was not entirely foreign to him. He made several trips to India and in 1912, his son Bhikhabhai, the founder of the firm of Master Brothers, came to this country. Ukabhai Premabhai was a devout Hindu and during Gandhi’s passive resistance struggle, met the Mahatma on a number of occasions in Johannesburg and followed the fateful events of those years with keen interest as would be natural during those tense days. Little is known of his other activities. He was born in India in 1861 and died in 1954 at the age of 93. Bhikabhai had instruction in the vernacular in India and when he arrived here it was the Johannesburg Indian School which saw to his early education in the English language. In the early 20’s he moved to Pretoria, after short periods in Louis Trichardt and Pietersburg where he had established Bookkeeping Agencies in partnership with relatives under the name of Master Brothers. While in Pretoria, he undertook the teaching of Gujerati and the name ‘“‘Master” was added to his family name and it was as Master Brothers in Johannesburg’s business world that he was to make his impact. In Pretoria he traded as a General Dealer and restless as ever, he moved to Brits where his first attempt as a businessman ended in disaster. Fire destroyed all his stock and the premises were gutted. Friends came to his rescue and he was soon in business again. This seemed to be a turning point in the family fortunes for within a short space of a few years, in partner- ship with a few friends, he ran two shops in Brits and two more in the district. In 1929 he moved to Johannesburg where he began manufacturing Ladies Hats. It was the first factory owned by Indians and he had to learn all there was about it through bitter experience. They say fortune favours the brave; its vindication in Master Brothers future expansion and a break into the wholesale trade soon after, aptly proved the point. The year 1942 saw Master Brothers move into its new multi-storey premises with the factory on the first floor. The new building inrorporated a temple, significant of the family’s religious leanings. Master Mansions was the first of the multi- storey buildings in the Indian sector in the Market Street Indian complex. Gifted with a true pioneering spirit, Bhikabhai was the first Secretary of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj and also one of its founders. He contributed generously to various causes and he was foremost in the various fund-raising efforts in the city. Such projects as the Hindu ward in the Johannesburg General Hospital, the Gandhi Hall and the Gandhi School, come to mind. He was treasurer to the Hindu Crematorium Committee and Founder, Secretary, Treasurer and Vice-President of the Transvaal Prajapte Association. He contributed generously to the Hindu Students’ Hostel and the Transvaal Prejapte Vidyarthi Ashram. He was also Gujerati corres- pondent to various overseas newspapers. He was a Trustee of the Phoenix Settlement. After the death of Manilal Gandhi he assisted materially in the running of the “Indian Opinion”. In 1960 he went on a Fund-Raising drive for a school, accompanied by Mrs. Gandhi and a few other members and covered Rhodesia and Zambia. He was also a Trustee of the Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust. During a lecture tour of Swami Nischalananda in 1954, he was the presiding Chairman of the Bharat Sanskar Samiti of the Hindu Seva Samaj. The lecture tour was sponsored by the Samiti. He was instrumental in setting up the Rama Krishna Childrens’ Club. At the time of the Johannesburg Festival the Swami brought a play called “Draupadi” which was staged at the Great Hall — Wits University — when a sum of R2,800 was raised. Thanks to Mr. Master’s efforts, the fund was utilized by the Swami to buy a site at Tongaat to establish “The Rama Krishna Childrens’ Home’ which was subsequently registered under the Welfare Act. He donated large sums towards the establish- ment of a School, Library (in memory of his late mother, Benabhai), and High School (which was named. after him). He had a vision of establishing a Cultural and Religious Centre in Vijalpur, India. Unfortunately, this could not be done during his lifetime but was completed by his heirs and it has become a unique institution in South Gujerat. It is known as the Bharati Sanskriti Bhawan which consists of a huge hall, stage-wings for instruction to Ladies in Knitting, Sewing and Embroidery; Childrens’ Nursery School; Free Dispensary and Library. It has paintings depicting scenes from Hindu mythology and saints drawn by prominent Hindu artists and panelling with the whole of the Gita in Sanskrit. He was bornin Aat, Dist.Surat, India in 1902.

---

## Page 24

194 THE MASTER FAMILY Continued . . . ast MASTER, = Arvind Bhikabhai: Director of Companies. Born on 12th March, 1934 at Aat, India. Ed: Navsari, Bombay and London (Elec. Eng.). Second son of B. Master. Business — Director — Family Group of Companies. Interests: Hockey and _ soccer. Married: Diwali B. Dajee. S 1;D l.- 454 MASTER, Harshad Bhikabhai: Director of Companies. Born on 22nd April, 1939, Vyalpur, India. Edu: Gurukul Supa, India, Sendou House, Sloan High and Lincoln’s Inn, London. Third son of B. Master. Businessman — Director — Parent Group of Companies. Interested in all sports: Chess. Bridge and Photography. Married: Prabhavati M.S. Mistry. S 1. 4h MIA. Moulana Hajee Mohammed Moosa: B: Sth January, 1905, Johannesburg. Edu: Johannesburg, Palanpur and Deoband, India. Qual. as Movli — First Class Honours — Deoband. One of the founders of Jamia Islamia at Dahbel, India. Also took a prominent part in the establishment of the Majlis-ilmi in 1930, under Hazrat Mohammed Anvar Shah, a Moulana of renown throughout the country. The institution has been endeavouring to collect old Muslim Mss in India. Several volumes have already been printed. In other activities, he was Chairman of the Y. Muslim Assoc. in the 20’s, the Mohamedan Education Inst., the Transvaal Indian Commercial Assoc. aid also represented the S.A.JLC. to the Select Committee on the Transvaal Land Tenure Bill at Cape Town. He was also Chairman of the Transvaal Muslim Assoc. in the early 30’s, He is a member of a family which has done outstanding work for the welfare of the Muslim community in the Transvaal in the field of religious instruction and vernacular and English education. The Waterval Institute stands as a monument to the family’s tremendous contribution. Director of Suliman Ismail Mia Group of Companies, he is an avid student of Muslim Philosophy and Literature. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 4 RAJNIKANT, B. Master: Director of Companies. Born on the 8th of September, 1929 at Brits, Tvl. Edu: Gandhi Hall, Genukul Supa (india), Hansraj Morarjee (Bom- bay), Public School, Sydenham College of Commerce & Economics Qualifications: B. Com. (Bombay). Travel: India, U.K., Europe, East Africa, Portuguese East Africa, Swaziland. Acts: Assistant Sec. & Trustee: Transvaal Prajapta Assoc. ; Trustee: Phoenix Settlement;Com. Mem. Tagore Centenary, Swami Vivekananda Centenary, Gandhi Centenary Celebration Council Tvl; Secretary of Rama Krishna Vedanta Society (Jhb.); Com. Member of Johannesburg Indian Social Welfare; Was Member: and Educational Committce: Gandhi Hall; Exec. Com. Mem: Hindu Seva Samaj; Rec.: Bridge and Travel. Married: Jyotsna, daughter of Harijivan Varia of Poona, India; $ 2; D 2. Bus. Add.: 33 West Street, Johannesburg Phone: 8387991. MEER, Ismail Moosa: Newspaper Editor. b. 22nd June, 1922, Surat, India. Educated: St. Anthony’s, Depot Road, Aligarh and St. Xa- “‘vier’s, Bombay, India. Son of Moosa Ismail Meer of Surat and Durban. Followed in father’s footsteps as Editor of the Natal paper, “The Indian Views” and other publications. The paper is the only Gujarati-English language publication in circulation. An out- spoken critic and fighter for the under-dog. Well-known for his : editorials in both languages. Ihs articles and editorials are appreciated and looked forward to by a readership extending over East and Central Africa, Reunion, Mauritius and Madagascar. Was recently invited by the United States Government to tour the country under the Cultural Exchange sponsorship programme, promoted by the State Information office. Has travelled widely — U.S., U.K., M.E., India, Pakistan, Europe and South-East and Central Africa and the Indian Ocean Islands of Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion; Rec.: Cricket, Travel and Literature. Died: 1972. Married: Fathima M. Meer; S 3; D 1. Res. Add.: 7 Benghazi Cres., Reservoir Hills, Durban. Phone: 857723; Died: 1972. ~ THE SOUTHERN sane § d wohiae WHO’S WHO & MINTY, Ahmed Ismail: B At Law. B: 19th January, 1908, Dahbel, Dist. Surat, India. Son of Ismail E. Minty. Origin: Dahbel, India - Edu: Allighar University, London University and Mid. Temple, Ldn. After qual. practised in Bombay for three years. Practising in S.A. since 1938. Legal firm of Minty Nanabhay & Partners in Jhb. Acts: Was Mem. T.I.0.; Also Sec. T.I.C. fora number of years. Pres: Nana Mem. Trust. Member of old pio- neering family. Connected with numerous other organisations. Sports: Tennis. Married S 2; D 2. Bus. Add: 17 Becker Street, Johannesburg. Phone: 838-1850. Res. Add: 24 Gilles Street, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. Phone: 834-6096. qb MEER, Yusuf Cassim: Business- Consultant — Sec. of Companies. B: 8th October, 1912, Dundee, Natal. Son of Cassim Meer of Dundee and Surat, India. Edu: Dundee, Marine College & UNISA. . CC.S., B.Com. Was one of leading figures in Northern Natal in the political field. On del. to Natal & S.A.LC. in the 40’s. Other Acts: Past Pres. Dundee & Dist. Muslim Soc.; Mosque & Madressa Islamia. Past Pres. & Trustee: Natal Indian F.A.; Pres. N.LC. (N.Ntl. Co-ord. Com.); Past Exec. Mem. N.1.0., S.A.LC.; Pres. South Coast F.A.; Past Pres. Isipingo Beach Civic Association; Isipingo Beach Sports Grounds Assoc. ; S.A. Indian F.A. Is now Pres. S.A.I.F.A. and V-P., S.A. Olympic & National Games Assoc. Married Ayesha Moosa Aysen of Kimberley. S 3; D S. Res: 49 Delta Road, Isipingo Beach, Natal. Phone: 91306. a4 MEHTAR, Mohammed Ahmed: Journalist and Poet. B: 12th Jan., 1912, Surat, India. Edu: Higher Grade, Durban. One of the few Muslim literary figures in this country. Has contributed regularly to Newspapers and overseas Maga- zines. A talented writer in verse and prose. One of his early works was “Fatima Hanoum”’. Recently published a book on Urdu poetry which has received wide acclaim here and overseas. Was sub-editor fo the “Indian Views” for many years. Also an Urdu teacher of note. Is at the present time on the staff of the Orient Islamic Institute, Durbamggppularly known as “Farooqi”’. MEERAN, Abdul Kader: School Principal. B: 16th April, 1908. Nottingham Road, Natal. Edu: Sutherlands & York Road, P.M.B. Joined teaching profession as Asst. Teacher at Sutherlands in 1923. Was with the N.E.D. from 1929 to the change-over to I.A.D. Was promoted to Vice-Principalship in 1946 and has been Principal since 1947 at various Govt. schools in the province. A glutton for the public good, has been associated with almost every Indian activity from the late 30’s, He was founder Mem. & Sec. N.N. Ind. Lawn T.U.; Pres. Dundee & Weenen County I.F.A.; Served as Selector, Pres., Manager and on Com. of Enquiry M.D.LF.A. and N.LF.A.; Was Mem. Inter-race Soccer Board; Was first Pres. N.I-C.U.; Sec. P.M.B. Ind. Sports Grounds Assoc. since 1949. In the educational and welfare fields, he was Org. Sec. P.M.B. Ind. Tech. Inst.; Mem. Zursary Loan Board - N.I.T.S. and Treas: N.LT.S. (local branch); Treas. Indo-European Joint Council; Trustee: Management Board - A.B. Soc.; Trustee: I.C.W.S.; Patron: Pentrich Muslim Soc.; Mem: Natal Muslim Council. Elected Member: Pietermaritzburg Indian Affairs, 1973. 46 J) A MEERAN, Mohamed: Despatch Clerk. B: July, 1909, Nottingham Road, Natal. Edu: Sutherlands G.A. Ind. School. Son of Ebrahim Meeran of Nottingham Road, Ntl. (Old Pioneer - connected with the Gen. Sir Duncan Mc Kenzie house- hold). After a few years asa farmer at Willowfontein, P.M.B., joined Eddels S.A. Ltd. in 1922. Gradu- ated from Leather Worker to Des- patch Clerk. Foundation Mem. of the S.A. Leather Workers’ Union (1926). Served in every capacity until 1959 when he resigned during the 1960 Strike. Other Acts: Soccer: Sec. Glen F.C. & Bells FL. (1925/30); Was elected to Presidency, County F.A. in the 40’s. Served in various caps. Del to Natal — M.C.LF.A. and Treas: Natal I.F.A.;P.M.B. Inter-race Board. Social: Pres., Treas. & Exec.: Pentrich Muslim Soc.; V.P. Exec.; and Bldg. Com.: Northdale Muslim Soc.; V.P.; Exec. Council and Pres.: Burial Soc., Raisethorpe Muslim Soc.; Also served as V. Chair.; Exec. & Relief Com.: P.M.B. I.C.W.S. Was V.C. and now Mem.: Raisethorpe Ratepayers Assoc. Was Chair.: Meal Com., E.P.S., Mem.: Edu. Board - P.M.B. Islamic Edu. Board. Rec: Angling and Gardening. Married: Fathima, eldest daughter of the Late Mohamed Ali of Edendale.S 4; D 1. Bus. Add: Eddels (S.A.} Ltd., Box 55, P.M.Burg. Phone: 29326. Res: 307 Khan Road, Raisethorpe, P.M.Burg. Phone: 21354. 468 MIA, Ismail Hoosen: Retired Businessman. Trading as General Dealers — Ismail’s Supply Store. Retired since 1969. One of old traders in Sydenham. Keen on all Religious, Education and Social acts. Trustee: Sparks Rd. Mohammediya Musjid. Visited Holy Land — Haj 1958. Rec: Religious studies. S 2; D 3. Bus. Add: 45 Stanley Copley Drive, Sydenham, Durban. Phone: 888818. Res.: 43 Stanley Copley Dr., Sydenham, Dbn. Phone: 888818.

---

