# Southern Africa Indian Who's Who (1971-72)

**Book ID:** southern-africa-whos-who-1971-pt7
**Total Pages:** 21

---

## Page 1

196 oF EL BA EI Re NR BA HX HE RE HERE HK BE BA HB HK HEH HE HE I OE EK IK IRIE SE KEKE IE IA EE EE THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Mistry Family | 461 HE IA PERE HEHE HOEHEI HEH HH BBE HEHE HH HB HLH HEH UBB HEHE HO HBB HEE HEU BH HEM MHOC B BX BB HO HH BB BIS I BS HO IK Born in Eru Navsari, District Surat, India in 1880, Sookha Govan Mistry arrived in the country at the age of 19 and settled in Volksrust. In 1903 he moved to Johannes- burg where he worked as a carpenter and cabinet maker. From 1906 he entered the fruit business having now settled in Bethal, in the Eastern Transvaal. From that period onwards to 1950 when he retired, he was connected with the Bethal-Ermelo-Leslie areas where he was in business in the fruit trade. Shortly after his arrival in Johannesburg in 1903 he joined the Passive Resistance Movement under Mahatma Gandhi and in 1907, he courted imprisonment for his convictions. He was also connected with the Tolstay Farm where he lived for over 3 years. He was a member of the Transvaal Prajapathee Association from its inception. Public spirited, he took a keen interest in all matters affecting the Indian community. He died in 1958 at the age of 78. x 2-32-2333. RAR oO) MORARJEE, Sookhabhai Mistry: Businessman. Born on 17th September, 1917, Eru, Navsari, District Surat, India. Ed; Bethal Govt. School and Newtown School. Son of Sookhabhai Mistry. Origin: Eru, Navsari, India. Public spirited. Interested in all activities affecting Indian com- munity, Pretoria and district. Del: Group Areas Board — A.M. Indian Traders Assoc.; Life Mem.: Inc. Bookkeepers Assoc. (S.A.); L. Mem.: C.A.S.A. (S.A.); Holds Diploma — Faculty of Secs. (S.A.); B. Com — Comm. University — New Delhi — India. Sec.: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Chair.: Hindu Youth League; V.C.: Pretoria Indian High School — Edu. Com. Also active member of various other cultural, educational, religious and social organisations. Toured U.K., Europe, M.E., India and African countries. Married: Bhuliben, daughter of Dajee Parshotam of Navsari, India. S 4; D 2. Bus. Add: 471 Boom Street, Pretoria. (Asiatic Bazaar). Phone: 24453. Res: 229-13th Avenue, Laudium. Phone: 30594. 41 DIAR, Sookha Mistry: Businessman. B: 26th February, 1925, Eru, Navsari, India. Ed: Bethal and Johannesburg — Newtown School. Second son of Sookhabhai Mistry, Businessman. Tailor. Established 1945. Bethal Tailors. Chairman: Tv]. Prajapathi Assoc. M: Jamna Nagar Bhaga, of Morgentzon, Tvl. S 1. D 4. Bus. Add: Box 319, Bethal, Phone: 419. Res: 27c Church Street, Bethal. q12. JINABHAI, Sookha Mistry: Businessman. B: 14th Novem- ber, 1934. Eru, Navsari, India. Ed: Pretoria High School. Quals: Mem: A.J.B-A.(S.A.) Director of Companies. Other Acts: Mem. Pretoria Hindu Youth League, Pretoria Seva Samaj, Pretoria Navyuga Mandal. Takes a keen interest in Religious, Social and Cultural acts. Interests: Travel and Literature. Has toured E.A. and India the same period (1963/4). M: Bhanumati, daughter of V.R. Mistry of Pietersburg. S 3. Bus. Add: 471 Boom Street, Asiatic Baz., Pretoria. Res: 337 - 5th Avenue, Laudium. G13 NAGINDAS, Sookha Mistry: B: 4th December, 1937, Eru, Navsari, India Ed: Pretoria Indian High School. Fourth son of Sookha Mistry. Businessman — Director of Companies — Kay’s Garage, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Other Activities: Mem.: Pretoria H. Seva Samaj, Pretoria Hindu Youth League, Pretoria Navyuga .Mandal. Takes keen interest in all sports. M: Shanti, daughter of Morar Dullabh of Wynberg, Jhb. D 1. Bus. Add: 471 Boom Str., Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Res.: 339 - Sth Ave., Laudium. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The H. N. Mistry Family of Pretoria 44 Of the early members of the Mistry clan which arrived in South Africa, Nana Nathoo Mistry, who was born in Vesma, Navsari, India, in 1858, settled here in 18957 At the early age of 37 he landed in Durban and after some months moved to the Transvaal where he settled in Johannesburg. He was soon in his stride in the wood- working trade — a trade that was handed from father to son as traditionally, this was the family following for generations in India. Some of the builders and carpenters who arrived in Natal earlier were also of the same clan who settled along the North Coast and impressed their art on many of the old buildings still to be seen in Natal. particularly in wood carved architecture and ornate cement moulding. In 1905, the second son of Nana Mistry joined his father in South Africa and settled in Volksrust, where the traditional family trade was carried on and after some years in Krugersdorp, Johannesburg became the headquarters of the family. In 1926 Haribhai Mistry, together with his two brothers opened a furniture factory in Newtown, Johannesburg, which specialised in home furniture. It was one of the first factories established by Indians and still runs under the family name. In 1939 he retired from business and is now settled in Pretoria, together with his three sons who run a business consultant agency as Mistry & Mistry. He is a member of the Transvaal Prajapathi Association and takes a keen interest in all matters concerning the welfare of the community in the Transvaal. He was honoured by the people of Vesma, India, when he was asked to lay the foundation stone of the Vesma Town Hall in 1963. He visited India onnumerous 197 occasions. He was born in Vesma in 1888. 1S RAMA, Hari Mistry: B: 18th May, 1920. Vesma, India. Ed: Newtown Govt. School and Sastri College. Second son of H.N. Mistry of Pretoria. Joined Mistry & Mistry in 1938. Acts: Mem. Tvl. Prajapathi Assoc. - Jhb. Also Hon. Auditor 1950/1. Director: Ritz Enterprises (Pty) Ltd. Rec: Tennis, Cricket. Travel: India, E.A. M: Dhanluxmi Ambaram Dhajee Khika. S 3; D 4. Bus. Add: 544 - 11th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 24516. Res: 544 - 11th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 38998. 4 1L CHAGAN, Hari, Mistry: (Chaganlal) B: 12th May, 1929 at Johannesburg. Ed: Newtown Govt. School, Navsari and Bombay (Matric) India. Third son of Hari N. Mistry of Pretoria. Joined Mistry & Mistry in 1964. Director — Ritz Enterprises. Activities: Mem. Tvl. Prajapathi Assoc.; Sec.; Rama Krishna Centre — Pretoria. Keen on all Religious and Educational Acts. Rec: Cricket. M: Dahiben Bhaga Bhika. S 2; D4. Bus. Add: 544 - 11th Street - Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 24516. Res: 544 - 11th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. q7a7 GOSAIBHAI, Haribhai Mistry: Business Consultant. Born 31st May, 1910, Vesma, India. Ed: Vesma & Kadsupa Boarding School, India. Son of Haribhai Mistry. Origin: Vesma, Navsari, India. Travelled numerous occasions to India, E.A. & P.E.A. Began as Bookkeeper in 1934. Took over the firm of Modi & Prajapathi the same year. The name — Mistry & Mistry ~was adopted at the same time. Activities: Sec.: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj (1938); P. Chair.: Tvl. Prajapathi Assoc. Was also Treasurer and Hon. Auditor of the Association for many years. Mem.: Hindu Seva Samaj — Johannesburg. Rec: Cricket, Litera- ture (religious). Married: Aumbaben, eldest daughter of Bhana Lakhoo of Eru, Navsari, India. S 4: D 2. Bus. Add: 544 - 11th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 24516. Res: 233 - 13th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria. Phone 796121.

---

## Page 2

198 The Jairam D. Mistry Family of Johannesburg ANG Little is known of the arrival of Daya Kana or Narotam Dayal, a name by which he was also known. He was born in Soyani, India, in 1895. He must have settled in this country during the early part of the century as there is indication that he made several voyages to India by 1920 as it was during this time that his eldest son, Jairam, first set foot in this country. Daya Kana died in 1931]. ae MISTRY, Jairam: B: 31st March, 1913 at Tundi, Palsana, India. Ed: India. Son of D. Mistry. Retired since 1967. Entered into partnership — Narotam Karson — Harrison Tailoring Depot — 1934. Established own business J. Daya. Was also in Outfitting business. Interested in all local activities. Has travelled widely. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO q3o SHANTILAL, Jairam Mistry: Born 3rd September, 1934 at Bodhan, District Surat, India. Ed: Jhb. Gandhi Bharath Vidyalay, Bodhan Primary (India), Bree St., Primary, ‘Jhb. High School. Origin: Tundi, India. Son of Jairam Daya. Arrived in South Africa in 1936. Eldest son of Jairam Daya, Gujerati Correspondent - Overseas Publica- tions. “Indian Op” Corr. - S.A. Has travelled extensively — India, Ceylon, Middle East, U.K., Europe, U.S.A., Mediterranean countries, Africa, Canada and Far East. Holds distinction — 1965/6/7/8/9/70/1/2. Million Dollar Round Table. Exceeded 2,000,000 Dollars — 1967. Was second in the world - top salesman - Life Insurance 1966. Third in the world - 1967. Won successive Awards - International Quality, 1967/8/9. Activities: C. Mem.: Tvl. Prajapati Association; C. Mem.: Vedanta Society — Rama Krishna; Mem. Life Underwriters Association — S.A., North City Brokers (Pty) Ltd.; Chief of Indian Agencies — S.A. (All Insurance Groups). Branch Manager: S.A. Permanent Bldg. Society. Managing Director: North City Brokers (Asian) Agency (Pty) Ltd. Rec: Music, Literature and Travel. Married: Maniben Magan Bhana of Durban. S 1; D 2. Bus. Add: 63b Bree Street, Johannesburg (Newtown). Box 42082, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. Phone: 8366969. Res: 3 Malherbe Street, Newtown, Jhb. Phone: 8366960. a | a2 i Dr. RANCHOD, Dayal Mistry: Selah Wreseltaaks ae i eet\ ve Born at Navsari, India. Education: Ambada, Dist. Surat, India. Edu: Mansad, Navsari, {ndia, Navsari High School, C.T. & Madras Unv. India. M.B.B.S. (Madras), D.T.M. & H. (Eng.) Son of Ukabhai Naran Mistry. Qualified in 1945. Housemanship - Govt. Medical Col. Did D.T.M. & H. in R.C.P. - Eng. 1948; Private Practice - 1948/67 - Johannesburg 1967, where he is now practising. Mem. of old pio- neering family - N.N. Mistry 1897. Interested in all local social activities. Travel: India, U.K., and East African countries. Rec: Bridge and Chess. Married: Maniben, daughter of Makan Chhiba. S 1: D 3. Bus. Add: Box 61375, Marshalltown, Jhb. Phone: 8345945. Res: 8th Street North, Lenasia. Kumbharpatid, Gujerati Schoo! Munsad, Navsari High School, Wesma Indian School, Sastri Coll., St. Mungo’s College - Glasgow. England, .Grant Medical College. Son of Dayal Naran, M.B.B.S. (Bombay). Qualified 1946. House- manship - H.M. Harkinson Das ’ Hospital, BomLay 1947. Arrived z in S.A. 1948. Private Practice - =" : > \. Kort Street. Memper of old pio- neering family, D. Nana, 1893. Interested in all local, social and cultural activities. Travel: India, E.A., PEA, Rhodesia. Rec: Bridge. cricket. Married: Bhagirathi. daughter of Motilal Jariwala, Bombay, India. S 3; D 2. Bus. Add: 4 Kort Street, Jhb. Box 61375, Marshalltown, Jhb. Phone: 8343433. Res: 6th Floor, Morter Mansions, West Street Johannesburg. Phone: 8383984. a . CHHAGAN, THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 199 The K. 8. Mistri Family Av> Atrived in South Africa in 1902 and settled in Durban. For some years he was associated with the firm of B. Ebrahim Ismail and Company, one of the leading Wholesalers in the country, with whom he served as Bookkeeper. He was previously with the N.G.R. for some years before joining this firm. In 1934 he entered into partnership with Mavjee Gopal and Company who were then trading as Retail Grocers in Victoria Street. After the dissolution of partnership in 1930, he branched out on his own as K.S. Mistri & Sons, a name which entered the field in 1934 but really came into operation in 1940 after the firm of Mavjee Gopal was dissolved. He took a keen interest in the activities of the Surat Hindoo, Prajapathi and other organisations. get KHOOSAL, Sookha Mistri: (Deceased 1947). B: 21st July, 1883, Vesma, India. Ed: Matric. (India) Bookkeeper. On leaving school he came to Durban in 1902 and joined the S.A. Railways and Harbours. Having worked for this Government Department for a short period, he joined the firm of B. Ebrahim & Co., a wellknown business establishment as Chief Accountant on a part-time basis. After leaving B. Ebrahim & Co., he opened his OWn business, trad- ing as K.S. Mistry & Sons. He was alse ectionately known as “Master” among his people. Acts: Ist Pres: Gujerati Scliool. Founder: Prajapathi Vidhayarthi Ashram (Navsari) and Dharamsala in Unai India. Sec.: Surat Prajapathi Association. 4&6 Khoosal Misti: (Deceased July 9tli, 1970). Born: 2st April, 1912, Vesma, India. Ed: Junior Certificate and Senior Bookkeeper. Arrived in S.A. in 1926. Was essentially a family man, apart from his business. His finest accomplishment was the erection of C.N.R. House (Cnr. Cross & Prince Edward Streets), a modern and up-to-date building, comprising of shops and offices. Was instrumental to bring about subsidiary branches of the parent firm, K.S. Mistri & Sons (Pty) Ltd. The firm has become one of the best-known business establishments in Durban. of Durban A supporter of many deserving causes, generosity was a symbolic trait in his character. Other Acts: Created Balwant Chhagan Mistri Education Trust — R20,000. Trustee of Phoenix Settlement Trust & Indian Centenary Trust. Rec: Reading. G&S RATILAL, Khoosal Mistri: Born 6th December, 1928, Vesma, India. Ed: Vesma Primary School, Mad- ressa High School, India, M.L. Sultan Tech. Coll., Congress High School. Diploma in Bookkeeping. Son of Khoosal Sookha. On leaving Primary School, he joined his brother, the late C.K. Mistri in the business known as K.S. Mistri & Sons (Pty) Ltd. Essentially a family man, the untimely death of his brother, C.K. Mistri, has meant greater responsibility on him. Keen on social and cultural matters, he also takes a keen Interest in educational matters. Other Acts: Mem. of the Ramakrishna Centre, Ramakrishna Vedanta Society, Rama- krishna Childrens? Holiday Home, Surat Arya Bhagan Mandal, Saptha Mandir and the Gujerat Eisteddfod Committee; Trustee and Executive Member of Surat Hindoo Association, the Surat Hindoo Educational Soc. Treasurer: Indian Retailers Association. Rec: Philatelist & Numismatist. Married: Pali Sookha Govind. § Dear Oli Bus. Add: 26 Cross Street. Durban. Phone: 68137. Res: Flat 2, 15 Cross Street, Durban. Phone: 25879. 9871 NARAN, Khoosal_ Mistri: (De- ceased: 9th November, 1960). Arrived in S.A. 19th March, 1930. Businessman. B: 2nd January, 1916 Vesma, India. Ed: Diploma in Bookkeeping with Distinction. After matriculating at Sastri Coll., he did a DiplomaCourse. Joined father’s establishment, K.S. Mistri & Sons (Pty) Ltd. and through his initiative, opened a branch of the company, in Prince Edward Street catering for the wholesale trade. He was the driving force in the development of the wholesale enterprise. Through his untiring efforts, the firm became a member of the Sugar Exchange Association and a Distributor for Cigarettes and tobacco. In spite of his failing health, he contributed tremendously to public and welfare work. Activities: Sec.: Surat Hindoo Association and Surat Hindoo Educa- cation Trust. Hobbies: Cricket.

---

## Page 3

200 The Kassan Mithal Family ase MITHAL, Kassan: Businessman. B: Palsana, India. Ed: Palsana. Joined Desai’s Refreshment Room, Durban in 1945. Public-spirited. Associated himself with the Gandhi movement in South Africa in 1909/13. Was Sec., Treas. & Pres.: Mandhata Hit Vardhar Mandal, from 1916; Mem.: Surat Hindoo Assoc. Contributed articles over the years to “The Indian Opinion” and “Patel Mitra’’, India, on Social Political and Educational matters. Popularly teferred to as “Master”. Charitably inclined. Keen supporter of Divine Life Society, Aryan Benevolent & Blind Society. Died: 12th June, 1970. 4134 MITHAL. Ramanlal: B: 30th April, 1942, Palsana, India. Edu: Surat Hindoo, Kathiawad, M.L. Sultan Technical College and Salisbury Island. Businessman. Joined family business 1960. Director - Desai’s Refreshment Room. Acts: Mem.: Surat Hindoo Association. Mithra Mandal & Mandhata Hit Vardhar Mandal. Keen scout. Ex scout. Ex Surat Hindoo Boy Scout, Dbn. Sports: Cricket, soccer, swimming. q, Bus. Add: 13 Etna Lane, Durban. Phone: 344214. Res: 4 Milton Rd. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 9D ‘HAL, Balwant K.: B: 20th ember, 1949. Ed: Surat Hindoo Gandhi Desai High School. ingest son of K. Mithal. 1: 9th February, 1969. adi MITHAL, Ichhi: Housewife. Wife of Kassan Mithai. Born in 1916, Ubher, District Navsari, India. Died: 26th January, 1963. a Me MITHAL, Nirmala: B: 9th D -, 1950. Wife of Ramanial mit.. . On staff of Progress Primary School, Kimberley. aaa MISTRY, Somjeebhai Lalioobhai: Businessman. B: 12th May, 1912, Pethan, Jalalpur, India. Edu: Tata School, Navsari and Jhb. Govt. Ind. School. Son of Lalloobhai Kooverjee. Arrived in South Africa 1920. Settled in Jhb. Moved to Nigel 1935. Prev. Bookkeeper. Joined firm of Modi & Prajapathi as partner. Estab. Mistry’s Commercial Agencies, 1950 and S.L. Mistry & Sons (Pty) Ltd. 1961. Gen. Agents Broker and Insurance Consultants, Middel- burg, since 1949. Other Acts: Was Joint Sec. & Treas.: Nigel Ind. Advisory Council (1937/42); Chair: Middelburg Hindu Samaj; Joint Sec.: Middelburg Ind. Com.: Chair.: Middelburg Ind. Edu. Com.; V.P.: Tvl. Prajapathi Assoc. Travel: India, E.A. Pakistan, P.E.A., Swaziland. Rec: Interested in all sports. Married: Jamnaben, daughter of Jogi Dajee of Jalalpore, India. S‘6;D 3. Bus. Add: Box 241, Middelburg. Phone: 6131. Res:..105 Jan Van Riebeeck Street. Phone: 416. MITHA, Sean Amod: Director of Companies. B: 4th Septemby. 1906, Stanger, Natal. Edv:: Stg.. G.A. Ind. School. Sen of Amod Mitha of Aliabada, Dist. Kathia- wad, India. Began business acts. in 1922. Trading at present under the name of Amod Mitha & Sons, General Wholesalers. Managing Director of S. Mitha Bros. (Pty) Lid. Originally traded in partner- ship with uncle up to 1939. Trust. of Starcer Islamic Madre’sa Soc. Inter’ * in communal affairs of Stanger and Districts. Went on Pilgrimage in 1945 and 1960. Rec: Reading and gardening. Married: Ayesha, daus*. er of 1. Mohamed of Kathiawad. D 1. Bus. Add: Box 38. Phone: 16, Stanger. Res: 214 Couper Street, Stanger. Phone 16. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO IIH I TEI EMH TIME HOEBE BE HEH I HE BK BK HOE EH HE HOEHK BE HE IIL HEHE BH NOE HB HEHE BH HOE BK IE HOEHEB HEH HEH IH HB HEB BJD 2 DE OD The Modi Family (Lalloobhai Modi) of Johannesburg SOE DE SOE DAEIIH SERB HEHE PR BA HEHE BE BE HEI BE HEIR HE HEB HK HEHE BH HOEHL BH HL HERB HOEHEB HOE I HOE BI HOEHEB I HBB 3k 3 9 I TE YE HE HE HE HE HE RE DE I 145 Born in Sisodra, Dist. Surat, India, in 1906, Balloobhai Parbhoodas Modi came to this country with his father in 1917. Parbhoodas Govindji, the elder, was born in Sisodra in 1875 and first arrived in South Africa in 1897. He had landed at one of the Cape ports and was for a short timein the town of Craddock and thereafter settled in business in Johannesburg. He made a number of trips to India between 1897 and 1920 and his voyage that year was the last one as he remained in India until his death in 1932. Lalloobhai Modi was educated at the Central Supa Boarding School in India in his formative years and he completed his education in South Africa at the Johannesburg Government Indian School. He spent some years in Pietersburg as a free-lance bookkeeper and then moved to Louis Trichardt where he opened a private school which he ran in his spare time, and at the same ‘me built up an extensive bookkeeping practice. He urned to India in 1925 where he remained for two years. n 1927, after his return from India, he established a Book- ker ping and Agency business in Pretoria. Later he admitted att.-r into the business and the firm became known as Modi & Prajapati. In 1929, the firm entered into partner- ship with several other business firms in Johannesburg. In 1933, the firm of Modi & Prajapati withdrew its interests from Pretoria and moved to Vred p in Johannesburg, shor a. firm opened a retail business under|the style of itte Chinese Warehouse”, handling siik and fine plates, With the development of the Gold Mining Induftry in Nigel, Mr. Modi went to Nigel and «tablished the first of the firm’s branches. ““The Japan Bazaar”. Not\long thereafter, the Johannesburg business was closed and\the firm trans- ferred all its trading activities to Nigel whdre, two more ahsidiaries, “The African Store” and “Nigel Drapers” were established. With the outbreak of the 2nd World War and the entry of Japan into the conflict, the trading style of Japan Bazaar had to be changed and the name “Modi’s Bazaar”, was adopted. In 1941, Mr. Madi severed his interests in Nigel and entered into partnership with the firm of “India House”’, the well-known wholesale business in Johannesburg. His associatio» with this firm ended in 1947 when Mr. Modi branched out on hi- ~wn ana estab- lished the firm of “Commercia. -ra‘ing Company” in Commissioner Street, J -n-« souceg, as Wholesale and Retail Merchants in i.s . sft Go is field. During the ensuing years he went into and developed the field of consumer credit in clothing, and «came a pioneer in this field amongst Indians in South Atrica. Today Mr. Modi is the active head of a large and thriving organisation, having 201 et tes tt rit tf iad several branches and assisted in its running by his sons. Insofar as public activities are concerned, as Chairman of the Nigel Indian Association, he served the Indian Commu- nity of Nigel well. It was during his Chairmanship that the present Mackenzieville Township was established in collaboration with the then Agent-General for India, Sir Sayed Raza Ali, and the local association. In Johannesburg, too, Lalloobhai Modi has been very active in community and educational affairs. He is a Foundation Member of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj and is its present President and also Chairman of its Board of Trustees. He is also Chairman of the following bodies: The Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust; The Gandhi Bharat Vidyalaya Com.; The Tvl. Modh Yuvuk Mandal. Widely travelled, he has visited India, East Africa, Portuguese East Africa, Rhodesia and other African Territories. q 46 KANTILAL, Lalloobhai Modi: B: 29th March, 1931, Johannesburg, Tvl. Ed: Jhb. Govt. Indian High School (Matric), University of Bombay & Witwatersrand. Quals: B. Commerce (Rand), L.L.B. (Bombay). Son of Lalloobhai P. Modi. Origin: Sisodra. Has travelled extensively — India, East Africa, Pottuguese East Africa and the Republic. Served a period of articles with leading firm of Lottee & Co. (Bombay) and then joined the system and Org. Div. of the Standard Vacuum Oil Co. (New Jersey) at H.Q. in Bombay for India, Burma and Ceylon. At present in business in Johannesburg. Also associated with Commercial Trading Co., Modisons, Top Grade Store, $.A. Security & Trust Corp. Interested in all local activities. Married: Savita Chunilal Dullabhbhai. S 1; D 1. Bus. Add: Box 9985 Commissioner St., Jhb. 39b, Phone: 8343931. Res: 36 Avenue Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. 497 HASMUKHLAL, Lalloobhai Modi: Director of Companies. B: 10th April, 1938 at Nigel, Tvl. Ed: Jhb. Ind. High School - Matriculated. Son of Lalloobhai Prabhoodas Modi. Origin: Sisodra, India. Toured whole of East Africa and India in 1961..Became Director of Family Group of Companies from 1954. Acts: P. Captain: Young Bharat Cricket Club, Jhb. Rec: Reading (Literature), Cricket and Tennis. Married: Taramati Premchandbhai (Haribhai). S 1; D 1. Bus. Add: 39b Commissioner St., Johannesburg. Phone: 8343931. Box 9985, Jhb. Res: Flat 21, Adams Arcade, 37 Commissioner St., Jhb. Phone: 8343931.

---

## Page 4

202 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE MODI FAMILY Continued... 49% MAHENDRABHAI, Lalloobhai Modi: B: 31st December, 1939 at Nigel, Tvl. Ed: Central High School. Son of Lalloobhai Prabhoodas Modi. Origin: Sisodra, India. Active member of the Gama Body Building & Judo Club. Holds a black belt in Judo and.a yellow belt in Karate. Also takes an active part in cricket and soccer. Widely travelled — U.K., Europe, Mediterranean countries, East Africa, Portuguese East Africa. Director - Parent Group of Co’s. Rec: Cricket, soccer, judo, karate. Married: Nirulata Lalloobhai N. Bhoola. Bus. Add: Box 9985, 39b Market Street, Jhb. Phone: 8386370. Res: Flat 14, Adams Arcade, 37 Commissioner Street, Jnb. Phone: 8343931. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA ahd ca? WG S WHO Dr. SHASHIKANT, Devabhai Mistry: B: 2nd July, 1934, at Johannesburg. Tvl. Edu: Madressa High School - Navsari, India. St. Xaviers College - Bombay, T.N. Medical College - Bombay, D.C.H. Eng. Medical Practitioner. Matric 1951 First Class with 3 distinctions. Qualified B.B.S. in 1959 at Bom- bay. Diploma in Child Health - Bombay 1951. Housemanship at Bombay Hospital and Baijubai Wadia Hospital for children, Bombay worked as research fellow in S.A. Inst. of Medical Research - Jhb. for 2 years. British Council for scholarship to study Diabetes at Guys Hospital, London in 1963/4. Diploma — Child Health ~ England in 1965. Paediatric Registrar at Aw SHOOKDEVBHAL, Lalloobhai Modi: B: 8th January, 1946 in Johannesburg. Ed: Jhb. Indian High School, University of Natal (Sth Year Med. Student) Matriculated. Son of Lalloobhai P. Modi. Origin: Sisodra, India. Medical Student. Rec: Cricket, soccer, tennis, judo, University Debates and Student Acts. Res: Box 9985, Johannesburg. BRK BA BK HA EH RE REE HERE x \oo\ Maganbhai Modi, the eldest son of Parbhoodas Govindjee, accompanied his father to this country in 1908 and settled in Vrededorp, Johannesburg. He began life at an early age, helping his father in the family fruit business, which entailed fong distances on foot all over the Reef. The family moved to Pretoria in the mid-20’s and some years later, in 1932, he established his first retail business in the Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria, as Magan Parbhoo. The business later moved to 376 Boom Street and it is here that the family still trades under its present style of M.P. Modi & Sons. He was a Foundation Member of the Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj and took a keen interest in all the communities activities in Pretoria. He was born in Sisodra, District Surat, India in 1897. He died in 1964 at the age of 67. hs HERE IE HE IKK EB BH HEH HE AEB HE HOE BE IIE BH HEI HH HEHE HH HL BE HE HOEBE HA BB HH HOE BK HEB HE BE XE BE BLA BB BEI HK HB HEB HE EH HEI HEI HE The Maganbhai Modi Family | of Pretoria \eoo BALVANTRAI, Lalloobhai Modi: B: 13th June, 1950 at Johannesburg. Educated: Nirvana High School, Lenasia, Transvaal. Matriculated. Son of Lalloobhai P. Modi. Origin: Sisodra, India. Active part in soccer and School! Debates and other School Acts. Rec: Literature. Ete Se. -5-$5£.5-$.5. 5-3 MODI, vou Maganbhai: Director of Companies: Born on the 14th August, 1925, Sisodra, India. Ed: Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Maganbhai Modi. Origin: Sisodra, India. B essman. Director: M.P. Modi & Sons, Modi Bros., Modi’s Investment, Asha Investments & Vee EM Wholesalers. Established first business in 1949. Other Acts: F. Mem. and P. Sec.: Pretoria Arya Yuvak Mandal; Mem.: Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj (Jhb); F. Mem.: Divine Life Society, Jhb.; Responsible for Aid India Fund-raising Committee, 1962. Del. to India for administration of fund. Served on J.1.S.W.A. Committee - Life Member, Exec. Mem.: Rama Krishna Vedanta Society - Lenasia Bldg. Proj. Married: Rukhsmani G. Naran. S J. Bus. Add: 27a Com- missioner St., Jnb. Box 4261, Jhb, Phone: 8348579. Res: Desai Mansions, 32 Becker Street, Ferreirstown, Jhb. Baragwanath Hospital in 1965 for 7 months. Private Medical Practice since 1966. Travel: Widely - Europe, India. Rec: Bridge. Married: Nirmala Chhagan K. Mistry of Dbn. S 1; D 1. Bus. Add: 4 Kort Street, Jhb. Box 61375. Marshalltown, Jhb. Phone: 8345945. Res: 44 High Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. Phone: 8346835. (ood MOHAMED, Ahmed Gora: Businessman. B: {5th October, 1929, Dbn. Ntl. Edu: Anjuman Isl. Madressa and St. Thomas, West- ville. Son of Manjee Noor Mohamed of Durban and Kathor, Surat Dist. India. One of early pioneers - 1886. Butchery - Rosevalley Butcheries - established by father in 1948 in Tongaat. Durban branch estab. in 1957. Manager since estab. Took over in 1965 as sole proprietor. Rec: Tennis and soccer. Hobby: Photography. M: S 2; D 4. Bus. Add: 261 Grey Street, Durban. | , Phone: 60095. Res: Bob’s Bidg., Ridge St., Tongaat, Ntl. \Oo 4+ > *habhat, India. Edu: Prestwich Primary School. First ; entered bus. scene ‘1948 - concern of D. Mohiamed & Co. b Retailers at Green Point. Estab. Golden Plate Restaurant - 1967. Silver Plate Restaurant - 1969. Deeply interested in Sufi Philosophy Quadri Order - Desciple. Trayel: M.E., Europe, Pakistan, India, Iraq, Iran and Africa untries. Act: Interested in all sports. Takes part in all social, ‘ cultural and religious activities of the community. Chair.: | Trafalgar High School Committee. Rec: All sports. M: S$ 1; D 2. Bus. Add: 66 Albert Street, Woodstock, C.P. Phone: 555234. Res: Shams Quarmar, Hein Road, Rylands Estate, C.P. Phone: 653929. \O0S j MAHOMED, Ebrahim: Printer. B: 7th April, 1934, Baroach, India. Edu: Ferreira Ind. School; Jhb. High. Son of Mohamed Hajee Essop. Was asso. with family concern - Essop’s Fruit (Estab. 1908) from 1950. Established own business - Jet Printers - 1958. One of few Muslim Printers in the Transvaal. Other Acts: Sec.: Star C.C. (Jhb); Clyde C.C.; Mem.: S.A. Kanamia Assoc., Ferreirastown Ind. Sch. | | QHAMED, Dawood: Businessman. B: January, 1925, 203 Edu. Com; Takes a keen interest in all comm. acts. Rec: Bridge. Travel: India, Far East, P.E.A., and Rhodesia M: Zubeida, daughter of Mohamed Dassoo of Pretoria. S$ 1;D5.Bus. Add: 141 Anderson St., Jhb. Phone: 335471. Res: 20 Diagonal Street, Johannesburg. Phone: 8365698. 100 G MOODLEY, Appasamy Munsamy: Retired Civil Servant. B: 8th May, 1905, Clairwood, Durban. Edu: South Coast Junction, Clairwood & Higher Grade School. Son of Appasamy Moodley of Clairwood and Gudiattham, S/India. Was in retail business with father initially. Joined Bakers Ltd. after some years in Printing Trade. Joined Civil Service in 1935. Was attached to Revenue Department and - as Inspector up to 1953. Took up Bookkeeping on casual basis and still active in the same field. Interested in music and photography. M: Poongavanam (Dec., 1963), daughter of Late M Pillay of Overport, Durban. S 4; D 4. Bus: Add: & Res: 174 Foreman Road, Sydenham, Durban. {oO 7 MOODLEY, Chinsamy Kolanda- samy: Land & Estate Agent. Born 12th June, 1914, Stanger. Edu: Tinley Manor & Shakas Kraal.Son of Kolandasamy Moodley of M. Presidency, India. Carrying on agency business in Shakas Kraal since 1945. Teaching prof. 1937/ 45. Father was pioneer business- man in area. Mr. Moodley is act. assoc. with various organisations. - Acts: Sec.: Ramakrishna Centre — Shakas Kraal; Joint Sec.: Rama- krishna Centre (Eteta); Sec. and ‘Trustee: S. Kraal & Dist. School Soc.; Joint Sec.: S. Kraat R/Payers Assoc.; Sec.: S. Kraal S.A. School Com.; Mem.: S. Kraal School Fund Com., LC.W.S. & F.O.S.A. (Stanger), Soil Conservation Com. (Stanger); Was a Com. Mem. of the Republican Festival Com. of Stanger (1966). Rec: Soccer. M: Rajamma, daughter of M.S. Moodley (Retired Clerk). S 2; D 1. Eldest son, V.C., now teaching at Stanger Primary. Bus. Add: Main Road, S. Kraal. Res: School Road, S. Kraal. 1008 MOODLEY, Ganasen Konapalan: Principal. Born: 6th June, 1932, (manda, Verulam, Natal. Educa: Moonsamy G.A. Sch., Tongaat High, Sastri College, Springfield T.C., U.N.LS.A. (Ext.), B.A.(59) U.E.D. (Ext.) (1960/3). Son of Konapalan Moodley. Joined teach- ing profession in 1953. Taught at various N.E.D. schools — through- 4 _ out the province. Acts: P. Pres.: 4 ~ Tea Estates Social Club - Inanda, A P. Mem.: Moonsamy G.A. School é Com.; P. Treas.: N.I.T.S. - Verulam Branch; Del.: N.[L.T.S. - Estcourt Branch; Exec.: N.{.T.S. (Natal) 1964). Rec: Tennis, travel and literature. M: Ruby Moodley, daughter of M. Moodley of Cavendish, Natal. D5. Bus. Add: Weenen S. Indian School, Box 71, Weenen. Res: Retief Street. Weenen. Natal. ot

---

## Page 5

204 jooA MOODLEY, Kalappan Magathaven Businessman. B: 16th, March, 1918 Park Rynie, Natal. Edu: P. Rynie Convent Sch. Son of Magathave: Moodley of P. Rynie and Aranie, Madras Pres., India. Was in turn employed by the Sugar Industry and the Liquor & Catering Trades. Broke into business in 1957; Prop. Sunrise Restaurant - P. Rynie - since 1963. Is a wellknown and popular figure in the area - public- spirited. Acts: Treas.: P. Rynie Ind. Ratepayers Assoc., Active Mem.: S.S.S. Music & Drartia Club; Saraswathie Orchestra (Scottburgh); P. Sec. & Record Clerk: Scott. Ind. Football Assoc.; P. Mem. of Exec: Sugar Workers Union (Renishaw) 1937/42; Exec.: Liquor & Catering Trades Employees’ Union; Exec. Mem.: Ind. Council for Natal (Scottburgh Branch). Was on delegation — Local Branch to Liquor & Catering Trades Union of Ntl. Rec: Music & Drama. M: Sowbygum D. Moodley of Springtown, Durban. S 4; D 3. Bus. Add: Box 24 - Park Rynie. Phone: 172 Scottburgh. Res: Second Street, Park Rynie, Natal. Phone: 172 Scottburgh. {oO MOODLEY, Kasavaloo Kurappana Supervisor. B: 28th April, 1908. P.M.B., Ntl. Edu: Westleyan Sch. and York Road School. Eldest son of Late Kurappana Moodley of P.M.B. (early pioneer stock). Began as Leather Worker with Eddels in . 1923. Graduated to Supervisor in Cw 1934. Keen worker in the Rel. Sy ore : field. Isa member of the Mariaman a Temple and the H.Y.M.A. Other : : atl : Acts: Mem.: Eddels Sports & Soc. ~ 5 Club;S.A. Leather Workers’ Union. Was a keen soccerite - played for Royals F.C. Rec: Angling. Sports: Tennis: M.J.L.T.C. M: Gonam, daughter of B. Pillay of Isipingo, Ntl. Bus. Add: Box 55, P.M.Burg- Phone: 29326. Res: 493 L.M. Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. \ol\ MOODLEY, Komarsamy Agambaram: Farmer & Business- man. B: 1898, Tongaat, Natal. Edu: Fairbreeze Ind. Sch. Son of Kumarsamy of Madras Pres., India. Farmed in the Glencoe area, Natal North Coast. Established first of businesses in Glendale 1936. Cane farmer since 1920. Well respected figure ~ reflected in various public posts held over the years. He was a member of the Child Welfare Society (Stanger), the Natal {nd. Congress; the Natal Ind. Cane Growers’ Assoc.; Chair.: Glendale Ind. Mill Group; Glendale Sugar Growers’ Assoc. He was a keen soccerite. Captained the Shakas Kraal and, Tinley Manor Clubs during his soccer playing days. Local farmers are indebted to him for the higher price obtained for cane form the Millers — it was due to his untiring efforts that this was achieved in the 40’s. The family farm, ‘‘Prospect”’, which lies at Asheville, Stanger, is now run by the second son, Mannie Moodley. M: Ankammah, daughter of Late Paul Chetty of Kearsney.S6;D 5. Fam. Add: Box 10,Kearsney. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO lolz MOODLEY, Maduray Goorasamy: Businessman & Sportsman. Born: 8th April, 1922, Pietersmaritzburg. Edu: Woodlands High Sch., P.M.B. Son of Mudaray Moodley. Began as leather worker at Eddels. Rose to Supervisor from Machinist and Charge Hand. Now connected with Dick Whittington, Manager. Shoes, Director in business - Partnership with wife - Moodleys Fruiterers, P.M.Burg. Colourful sports career. Repres. S.A. Inds. against S.A. Coloureds (1945) at Jhb. Repres. Natal several times 1941 - 1955. Repres. P.M.Burg Dist. at soccer and cricket. Soccer for Juvenile to Senior routes over 20 years. Also tennis — P.M.Burg — M.L.L.T.C. as playing’ mem. Past. Sec. : M. Ind. Referees Assoc., Mem.: Woodlands Old Boys’ Club. Past Mem. & Ex. Divine Life Soc. S.A., Visited India — Rishikesh 1959/1960. Rec: Soccer, Music, Literature. M: Radhambal Pillay. $ 2; D 4. Bus. Add: 91 East Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Phone: 29031 Nod 2 MOODLEY, Lutchman Singaram: Printer. B: 2nd October, 1920. Pietermaritzburg. Edu: York Rd., P.M.Burg. Outstanding sports administrator and public worker. Office bearer in almost every social Religious, Sports,Welfare & Educa tional body in the Canital. Act: P. Sec.: M.D.I.C.U. w M.D.I.7 4 Comm. Mem.: S.A. Referees’ Asso. P. Pres.: Natal Indian Referees’ Asso. P. Sec.: P.M.B. Inter-race Board. Del. to various Proy. & Dist. Soccer & Cricket bodies. P. Coun- cillor: North Natal Soccer Board and North Natal Cricket Board of Control. P. Sec.: P.M.B. Indian Technical Institute: P.M.B. Indian Swimming Asso. V. Chair.: Depavalie Cheer Soc.; Sec. & Councillor: Aryan Benevolent Soc. since 1967. On Board of Management — Sunlit Gardens Hone. V.Pres.: P.M.B. Indian C.W.S.— Exec. Mem.: Indian Mid Mar Committee. Councillor: Social Services of S.A. Elected to Pietermaritzburg Ind. Local Affairs Committee, 1967. A tireless and dedicated worker. Mz Ranganaigan C. Moodley. 8 4; D 2. Res. Add: 21 Moosa’s Flats, 496 Pietermaritz Street, Pietermaritzburg. lo! + MOODLEY, Manikiam Abbu: B: 1890, Dasipuram, India. Arrived in South Africa 1898 (S.S. Pongola). Settled in the Burrow Green area, Tea Estates. Indentured to Aiken Family. Later farmed on leased land. Now lives in retire- ment since 1963. Present at public hanging of two Indian men for murder of Estate overseer, Port Shepstone goal, early 1900. M: S 7; D 2. Res: S The Ridge, Port Shepstone. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO IOIS MOODLEY, Moonsamy Maduray: School Principal. Born: 21st September, 1937. Edu: Kelso, Umzinto High and Springfield College. Eldest son of P.M. Moodley of Kelso and Cliffdale. Joined teaching service 1959 — Cliffdale. Was Acting Principal for short period — 1966. Acting Principal since 1967 to date. Active in social and educa- tional fields. Was instrumental in influencing Depart. of Agriculture to change intending Legislation governing farming near Natal water courses and also instrumen al in obtaining — 50% N.P.A. subsidy on by-roads and getting part of local roads proclaimed as District roads. Other acts: Patron: Cliffham F.C.; Assistant Sec. Cliffdale Agri. Asso. (1959-64); Chair.: Cliffdale Agri. Asso. (1967 onwards); Com.Mem.: Cliffdale Ind. Assoc. Acts as liaison between the Comm. and the Dept. of Agri. Tech. Services. Rec: Horticulture. M: Subbamah, daughter of M.A. Reddy of Cliffdale. S 1; D 1. Bus. Add: Cliffdale Ind. School. Res: Cliffdale, Natal. (cG MOODLEY, Muthusamy Packrey: Director of Companies. B: 22nd September, 1926, Witbank. Tvl. Edu: Witbank, Johannesburg High and Kimberley High. Son of Packrey Moodley. Origin: Mauritius. Acts: Int. in all local acts. One of most progressive Indian businessmen in Pretoria, & Dist. Local Chrysler agent — Laudium — Chrysler — Pretoria — Veritable dynamo in Motor Trade. Int. in all activities. Rec: Soccer, travel. M: Govindama, daughter of Narainsamy Pillay. S 3; D 3. Bus. Add: 58 - 17th Street, Laudium. Phone: 795565. (ol MOODLEY, Nadaraju Appasamy: Farmer: B: August, 1898, Newlands, Dbn. Edu: Newlands Ind. Sch. Son of Appasamy Moodley of Newlands and Kalave, Madras Pr-videnc, -ndia. Farming in the Inanda area since 1933. as a Wellknown personality in the Dist. Takes keen int. in all educational, charitable and social matters affecting community. Other Acts: V.C.: Moonsamy G.A. School — Inanda; Mem.: Ntl. Est. Ind. Mill Group. Rec: Gardening. M: Kamalam Doorsamy of Verulam. S 6; D 7. Bus. Add: Box 162, Verulam. Phone: 96. Res: Inanda Tea Estates. lors MOODLEY, Sunthanan Agambaram: Dist. Manager — Life Ass. B: 1st January, 1924, Dbn. Edu: Umgeni Road, Sastri Coll ., Dbn. Was formerly a Bookkeeper. Joined Insurance -fieldg Dec. 1960. One of outstanding underwriters in the business. Dist. Manager - Sun Life Ass. Co. of Canada. Has qualified for the M.D.R.T. since 1966. Life Mem.: M.D.R.T. Leader Southern Division - Sun Life Ass. and winner, International Quality Award. S.A. rep. - Sun Life Cen- tennial, Montreal, 1971. Attended M.D.R.T., Switzerland & U.S.A. Widely travelled — U‘S., Canada, U.K., Europe, Far East, India, Ceylon and P.E.A. Takes a keen interest in all local acts. Director: Gemini Theatres (Pty) Ltd. Interests: Swimming & Tennis. M: Rajambal R.N. Naiker, $ 3. Bus. Add: 26/29 K.M.S. Hse., 173 Grey St., Dbn. Phone: 67342/65585. Res: 508 Brick- field Road, Overport, Durban. Phone: 888943. 5014 a MOODLEY, Subramony Arumugam: B: 18th December, 1917, Mooi River, Natal. Edu: St. Pauls & York Road Govt. Sch., P.M.B. Son of Arumugam Moodley. .Origin: Madras Pres., India. First entered laundry business 1938. Moodley’s Laundry & Dry Cleaners. Acts: P. Sec., Treas., Pres. & Capt.: Springboks F.C. (Mooi River); Pres.: Rama- krishna Mission (Mooi River); V.C.: A.I. Kajee School Edu. Com. Rec: Soccer, Angling. Married: Magaluchmee, daughter of K. Pillay of Mayville, Durban. S 3; D 2. Bus. Add: Box 92 Mooi River. Phone 132. Res: Market Street, Mooi River, Natal. Phone: 132. lo2O MOODLEY, Soobramoney Ramsamy: Businessman & Farmer. B: lst May, 1919, Nonoti Drift, Darnall. Edu: Darnall Ind. Sch. & Stanger. Son of Ramsamy (Sirdar) Moodley (Snr.) Was connected with Huletts as a Sirdar in the early 70’s. The present Moodley farm was obtained with the help of Huletts. Mr. Subramoney Moodley now runs the farm. He is keenly interested in religion and social work affecting the Indian Com. Member & Supporter — Divine Life Soc., Trustee Nonoti Drift Siva Temple. Central Com. Mem.: Natal Ind. Cane Growers’ Assoc., Ex Mem.: Darnall Ind. Mill Group; Mem.: Non-European Mill Board. Res: Religious Literature. Bus. Add: P.O. Box 33, Darnall. Phone: 35. Res. Add: Nonoti Drift, Darnail. (O2| MOOLA, Amod Mahomed: Director of Companies: B: 14th August, 1909, Umzinto, Natal. Origin: Kathor, Dist. Surat, India. Edu: Umzinto. S.s.o. Mahomed Suleman Moola. Began business career in 1924 and in 1927, joined the firm of Lockhat Bros. & Co. (Pty) Ltd. Had a meteoric rise to managership of Lockhat’s and is today, Chairman of the Company, and its various subsidiaries. One of the. leading personalities in the public sphere, he is Trustee of the Hajee A.M. Lockhat Wakuff Trust, the Lockhat Charities Trust, the A.M. Lockhat Charitable Trust, A.M. Moolla Charity Trust, Madressa Anjuman Islam Trust, M.K. Gandhi Memorial Trust and vatious other Trust here and in Kathor, India. He is Chairman of the Orient Islamic Educational Inst., the Indian Centenary Scholarship Trust and the Muslim Merchants’ Charitable Trust. In the purely educational field, he is Grantee of the Orient Islamic High & Primary Schools, the Anjuman Islam and Ahmedia Schools amongst others and is a Member of the M.L. Sultan Technical College Council. He initiated the move for a joint Indian-Anglican Church Hospital Board for the running of St. Aidan’s Hospital and-is Chairman of the present Board of Management. He is also Chairman of the R.K. Khan Hospital Advisory Board. Politically, he was concerned with the activities of the S.A.I.0. for many years and is now a member of the South African Indian Council and Chairman of its Group Areas Committee. Awarded the Coronation Medal for outstanding services. Add: 104 Commercial Road, Durban. Phone: 23993. ' %

---

## Page 6

206 \o1% MOOLA, Abdul Hack A: Businessman. B: 26th June, 1937, New Hanover, Ntl. Ed: New Hanover, Stanger, Lidgetton & Waterval Inst., Umzinto High, Chakas Kraal. Son of Ahmed I. Moola. Origin: Omarvada, Dist. Surat, India. Joined family business - Dee Mont Trading Co. - 1953. Moved to Richmond 1964 - Corner Stores. Acts: Chair.: Richmond Ind. Sports Club; V.C.: RHD. Indian Ratepayers Assoc.; Com. Mem.: L.C.W.S.; Trustee: RHD Muslim Madressa Trust; Elected to: RHD. Local Affairs Com. 1969/71; Re-elected to L.A.C. - 1971/73; P. Mem.: RHD. Ind. Sch. Edu. Com.; Auditor: RHD. Ind. Sch. (Fund Committee). Rec: Cricket, Islamic Literature. Travel: Rhodesia, Swazi- land & P.E.A. M: Rabia Suleman Angar. $4; D 2.Bus. Add: Box 90, RHD. Phone: 65. Res: 24 Harding Street, Richmond, Natal. Phone: 301. \oL> MOOLA, Ahmed Mohamed: Businessman. B: 1907, Kathor, India. Edu: Kathor, India. S.o. in South Africa 1920. Second son of M.E. Moola - pioneer 1886. Estab. own bus. 1931.- A. Bilai (Pty) Ltd., leading retailers in Amersfoort Main Street. Was one of founders of local. Mosque and Madressa. Travel: Middle East countries - Haj (1967), Pakistan and India, numerous occasions. Rec: Int. in all sports. M: Amina daughter of Mohamed Bilai of Kathor.S 4;D 3. Bus. Add: Box 124, Amersfoort. Ph: 71. Res.: 32 Scheiding Street, Amersfoort. tloLt MOOLA, Dawood Essop: Director of Companies. B: 4th November, 1919, Stanger. Edu: Stanger Ind. Sch. & Sastri Coll. S.o. EM. Moolla Leading businessman in Central Stanger. Director of various sub- sidiary companies. Planters Garage, Planters Tyre Service, Dawnside Service Station, North Coast Pass. Service, Demla Investments. Began business career in 1937 as Moollas Garage. Is an Hon. Life Pres.: Lower Tugela Cricket Union, V.C.: Stanger Ratepayers Association. Council Mem.: M.L.S.T.C. (Stgr. Branch) A Past V.C. of Stanger Madressa. Rep. Stanger & Dist. in Representative Cricket and Soccer. M: Hava, daughter of Late Suleman Asmal. S 2; D 2; Bus. Add: Box 41, Stanger. Phone 191. Res. Add: Berthwell Drive, Stanger, Natal. Phone: 407: Mohamed Ebrahim Moola. Arrived * THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 02s MOOLA, Dawood Jeewa: Business man. Born: 24th August, 1919, Omarwada, Dist. Surat, India. Edu: Stanger G.A. Ind. Sch. S.o. Jeewa Essack Moola of Omarwada, Dist. Surat, India. The firm of Mohamed Essop & Co. was estab. in 1920. Mr. Moola senior ran this estab. in partnership with Mr. Mohamed Essop. In 1939 Mr. Dawood Moola joined the firm and has been connected with it since then. Is a Director in two other concerns: North Coast Motor Spares - Stgr. and Gora’s Store. Acts: Mem.: Parakabad S.A. Sch. Ed. Com.; Mem.: Parakabad State- Aided Ind. Sch. Board, Parent-Teachers Assoc. - Glendale. Is keenly interested in all rhatters concerning welfare of community. Rec: Fishing, hunting. M: S 6; D 6. Bus. Add: Box 53, Stgr. Phone: 465. Res: Glendale. Ph: 9 (Glenmil). 0 uw MOOLA, Mohamed (Oranjab) Aurangazab “Boetie”: Businessman. B: 3rd October, 1929, Wolmaranstad, Tvl. Edu: Bree Street Govt. Sch. S.o. Yusuf M. Moola. Origin: Kolvad, India. Established Travel Agency — “‘Haj” Boeties Travel Agency ~— 1965. Also in wig manufacturing bus. Keen in cult. and other acts. Travel: Haj, M.E., E.A., P.E.A., Europe & U.K. Acts: Sec.: Y.M.M.A.; Exec. Mem.: C.1.T.; Com. Mem.: Lenasia Parent-Teachers Association. Johannesburg Ind. Social Welfare; Patron: Arsenal C.C. (Jhb). Ints.: Soccer and Cricket. M: Rokaiya, daughter of Suleman Patel. S 5; D 2. Bus. Add: 22 Market St., Jhb. Phone: 8382265. Res: 95 - 2nd Avenue, Lenasia. \o271 Director of Companies. B: 18th December, 1902, Ladysmith, Ntl. Joined family business at an early age and in 1930 became one of the directors, in charge of the more complex paper work of the busi- ness. A shrewd bustness brain, “M.A.” as he is popularly known, was one of the driving forces in the expansion of the firm into various fields. He is the only survivor of the 1930 directorate. He also had other interests outside the parent Company amongst which figured, Unani Labs. (Pty) Ltd., I.M. Mether (Pty) Ltd., Glencoe Gen. Dists. (Pty) Ltd. and Bossomworth Investments. He has held various official posts in almost every Ladysmith org. He was active during the last war in the Governor General’s Fund and has been a keen supporter of various Charitable and Welfare bodies in the district. Res. Auv Forbes Street, Ladysmith, Natal. MOOLA, Mahomed Amod: —2 THE ie mech at sora WHO'S WHO MOOLA, Mahomed Amod Essop: Businessman ~— L.A.C. B: 26th April, 1922, Alcockspruit, Natal. Edu: Ladysmith Govt. Aided Indian School and Sastri College. S.o. Amod (John) Moola and grandson of Essop Moola, pioneering businessman of Ladysmith. Director of wellknown firm of M.M. Amod & Co. (Pty) Ltd., of Ladysmith — estab. 1887. Popular figure on the local scene. Elected to Local Affairs Committee at polls for period 1967/9. Acts: Mem.: FOSA, Ladysmith Ind. C.W. Soc.; P. Sec.: K.R-D.LF.A.; ?.P. : Uplands Football Assoc.; Chair.: M.L. Sultan Edu. Comm. Connected with numerous other org. and insts. Married: Khatija, daughter. of Mrs. and the Late Hajee I.A. Moola of Ladysmith. S 3; D 1. Bus. Add: Box 47, Ladysmith, Phone: 129. Res: 88 Lyell St., L/Smith. Phone: 538. jo24 MOOLA, Ebrahim M: Businessman. B: 23rd August, 1924, Dannhauser, Natal. Edu: Dannhauser Indian School, and Sastri College. S.o. Mohamed Dawjee Moola. Resident in Glencoe since 1950 and estab. first business — Hopewell Bazaars, in 1962, New & Second-hand Furniture Stockists. Acts: An elected member of the Local Affairs Committee, Glencoe, 1966 and re-elected in 1967 for further period of 2 years. Active in various orgs.: Treas.: Glencoe Milad-un Nabi Celebration Com. Was an active soccerite. Repres. & Captained Northern Natal at Soccer. M: Mariam, daughter of A.C. Peer. Bus. Add; 66 Biggar, Glencoe. Phone: 3; Res. Add: 5 Schroeders Road, Glencoe, Natal. fio ‘3o MOOLOO, Latchman R: Businessman. B: 23rd March, 1922, Pretoria, Transvaal. Edu: Pretoria Indian School. S.o. Ramnarthoo Mooloo. Estab. own bus. at Lady Sel- bourne — African Express Store & Restaurant 1948/68. Moved to Laudium and opened Bar & Bottle Store — New Era Bar & Bottle Store (Pty) Ltd. and Discount Enterprises (Pty) Ltd. in 1966. Travel: E. Africa (Safari) Rhodesias, P.E.A. and African Territories. Acts: Int. in all local acts. Was connected with numerous local orgs. and bodies over the years. Rec: Soccer, Cambridge F.C.; Kismet C.C. M: Rabia, Bus. Add: 183 Boom St., As. Bazaar, Pretoria. Phone: 25905. Res: 229 Pearl St.. Laudium. Phone: 25098. \o3\ MOOSA, Suleman Ismail: Busi- nessman. b. 23rd September, 1927, Bombay, India. Edu.: St. Mary’s High School and Wilson College, Bombay. Son of Ismail A. H. Moosa. Origin: Thadkesh- var, India. Was connected with the Simplex Group of Companies until 1960. Established Prince Dry Cleaners the same year. Is one of the few Muslims tohave qualified as a pilot in South Africa. Was also connected with Earl Fashions of Durban. Has travelled widely — Middle East 1934/64, Europe and U.K., India, Pakistan and African countties. Activities: Member: Orient Club, Durban; Buzme Adab, Durban. Was a Science Student at Wilson College ~ Bombay, India. Interested in all Sports. Married: Rassool Bibi, daughter of M. A. H. Moosa; S 3;D 1. Bus. Add.: 39 Prince Edward ~ street, Durban — Phone: 27786; Res. Add.: 91 Halpin Avenue, Reservoir Hills, Durban — Phone—. 1oZe 207 MOOTHOO, Govindsamy: Industrial Clerk. b. 6th Aug., 1912, Johannesburg, Transvaal, South Africa. Educated: Govt. Coloured School and Tamil Vedic, Pretoria. Son of Govindsamy Chetty. Origin: Karikal, Thibari, Madras, India. Interested in sculpting and allied handicrafts. Pioneer in this field in Pretoria area and founder of Riverside Pottery Works. Opened first Tamil School in Laudium. Tamil teacher and scholar. Other Activities: First Secretary: Pretorians F/C; Was Hon. Sec.: Tamil Vedic Y.M.A. (1931/32); Was Hon. Record Clerk P.D.LLF.A. (1934); Was Secretary T.LF.A. (1935); Presi- dent: Pretoria Health and Strength Physical Club for many years. Was President: P.D.I-F.A. (1937/38); Hon. Secre- tary of Shir Hindu Temple Com. (1938); President of Swaraj C/C (1937/38); S.A.LF.A (thrice). Sports: Was active in Rugby, Cricket and Tennis. Married: Rookoo- manie, daughter of Ruthman Naidoo of Germiston, TVL.; D 6. Bus. Add.: 142 Bessemer Road, Indian Site, Pretoria West — Phone: 794992; Res. Add.: 237 —.5th Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. [O33 MOTA, Amod Mahomed: Businessman. b. 30th May, 1923, Durban, Natal. Educated: M. O. School. Son of Mahomed Mota. Origin: Jithali, District Surat, India. Entered Tailoring as apprentice 1940. Established own business, 1946 — Regent Tailors. Stockists of all types of suiting and bespoke Tailors. Travel: Zambia, Malawi, Rhodesia and African territories. Activities: Secretary of Pietermaritzburg Masjid and Islamia School Trust; Chair- man of Nizamia Muslim Society, 1965/71; Past Member: N.LC.; Vice Chairman: Raisethorpe Muslim Society; Grantee: Nizamia School. Interested in all Welfare work. Rec.: Soccer and Literature. Married: S 4; D 1. Bus. Add.: 25 Ginman Lane, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 52066; Res. Add.: 50 Khan Road, Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg, Phone: 20023. lo34¥ MOTALA, Hajee Ahmed Salehjee: Bookkeeper and Business Consul- tant. b. 31st January, 1925, Was- bank, Natal. Educated: Dundee Indian High School. Son of Saleh- jee Moosa Motala. Origin: Surat, India. Went on pilgrimage to Mec- ca and toured Europe and Middle East during 1968 and now resident at Isipingo Beach. Was previously Manager of Green House (Pty.) Ltd., Dundee, 1940/50. Estab. own business — Motala’s General Merchants and Retailers — Dun- dee. Now Managing Director of Jadsons Trading Centre (Pty.) Ltd., Main Road, Isipingo Rail. Also Director — Talana Syndicate (Pty.) Ltd. Other Activities: Past Secretary: United Muslim Roshun Club. Dundee; Bookkeeper/Secretary: Numerous business firms and institutions; Assistant Secretary: Mosque and Madressa E. Islam Trust, Dundee; Dundee and District Muslim Soc.; Dundee Indian Tennis Club; Rec.: Tennis. Married: Rashida, youngest daughter of Moosa Haffejee; S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: 14b Old Main Road, Isipingo Rail — Phone: cee Res, Add.: 9 Ridge Road, Isipingo Beach — Phone:

---

## Page 7

208 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The M. T. Mooloo Family \o D9. One of the most colourful of the early settlers in Pretoria was Toolsie Mooloo who came to the Transvaal in 1889. The son of an indentured labourer, he was one of the first of the Hindi-speaking immigrants. Shortly after his arrival he joined the.C.L.D. and remained in Government employ for over fourteen years. He established his first Retail busi- ness in Pretoria during the Boer War and it was not long before he was in the property market and by 1930, he was one of the biggest property owners in the Capital in the Asiatic Bazaar complex. He was a pioneer in Pretoria’s Indian Taxi business and owned a fleet of vehicles which operated to ail points of the compass. He took a very keen interest in the Social, Religious, Cultural, Sporting and Political activities of the Indian community. He teok a leading part in the Passive Resistance Struggle early this century and courted imprisonment for his convictions. Born in 1869 in Durban, he was the eldest of a family of six. His death in 1934 at the age of sixty five robbed the city of a personality, closely associated with the develop- ment and character of Pretoria. \036 MOOLOO, Mohanlal Toolsie: Businessman. b. 27th July, 1913 at Pretoria. Educated: Ferguson Coloured School. Son of Toolsie Mooloo. Joined firm of H. S. Ebrahim (Pty.) Ltd. in 1930. Secretary and Public Relations Officer. Established Lalee’s Cafe & Restaurant in 1946. Was appointed Com. of Oaths, 1942. Past Member: Advisory Board — Laudium Indian Township; Patron: Pretoria and District F/A; President: U.T.I.C.U., 1942/ 1945; Hon. L/V/P: P and D.I.F.A.; Pretorians F/C; N.T.LC.U.; F/Member: Transvaal Indian C. Union and First President: (1944/45); Trustee: Pretoria Indian Sports Board. Was Treasurer: Transvaal Indian F/A (1947/ 48); H.L.V.P.: Inter-race Soccer Board; President: Past Sanathan Veda Dharma Sabha; Secretary: Pretoria and District Indian Traders and Stall Holders Association; F/M: Indian F/A of South Africa; First Treasurer and Del. to F.A.S.A.; F/M and President: Pretoria Indian Parent/ Teachers Association; Chairman: Education and Finance Com. — Pretoria Indian Primary School. Rec.: Soccer and Cricket, Angling and Camping. Married: Phoolmathie, daughter of Kunge Beharie of Johannesburg; S 8; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 709, Pretoria — Phone: 2499617; Res. Add.: 251-13th Street, Laudium, Pretoria — Phone24555. jos RABICHAND (Bobby) Mooloo: b. 31st March, 1945 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Third son of Mohanlal Mooloo. Promotor of Shows and Record Artist. Interests: Soccer and Angling; Director: Pretorians Football Club (Professional). (O33 BRIGLAL, Mooloo: Businessman. b. 27th December, 1938 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School Eldest son of Mohanlal Mooloo. Motor Mechanic. Appointed C.O. 1962. Married: Premilla G. R. Singh; S 1; D 1. Interests: All Sports, Angling and Music. Club: Pretorias Football Club. 10%4 PRITHVIRAJ, Mooloa: b. 24th October, 1942. Third son of Mohanlal Mooloo. Educated: Pretoria High School. Married: Mariam. Motor Mechanic and Panel Beater. Interests: All Sports, Judo and Karate; Club: Pretorians Football Club. Instructor in Judo and Karate. logo RAJENRALAL, Mooloo: b. 10th July, 1947, Pretona. Educated: Pretoria High School. Fourth son of Mohanlal! Mooloo. Accountant. Interests: Dancing, Angling and ali Sports. Soccer: Pretorians Football Club. (o4) PRAKASH, Mooloo: b. 26th January, 1956, Pretoria. Educated: Laudium Primary School. Fifth sén of Mohan- lal Mooloo. Student; Interests: Soccer and Angling. { f —— THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 209 The Haffejee Moosa Family of Durban The pioneer of the family arrived in this country in 1894. The early roots of the family were in Burma and later in Mauritius where Hafez Hajee Moosa had settled for a while before embarking for this country. The family went under the name of Seedat originally and at some stage of their history, changed to Moosa in India. In 1895, he established his first busi- ness in Durban in West Street and ten years later, moved to Field St. The firm moved to its Commercial Road address in 1917. Founder of the firm of A. H. Moosa & Sons, he was one of the early pioneers who succeeded against all odds and establishment what proved to be the forerunner of today’s huge business empire. Charitably inclined and public spirited to a remarkable degree, he left his mark on the South African scene in no uncertain terms. Born in Tadkeshvad, India, in 1868. He died in Durban in 1955 at the age of eighty seven. His eldest son, Hajee Ismail, joined him in business in 1904 as a fully fledged partner under the name of Haffejee Moosa & Sons. Hajee Ismail took a keen interest in Indian Affairs and was one of Mahatma Gandhi’s early supporters in the Passive Resistance struggle in Natal. In 1914, he established an Import-Export business in Bombay. He died in Arabia in 1934. Hajee Mohamed Moosa Joined the family business in 1916. He took a notable part in various activities affect- ing Indians in Durban and in 1926, was one of Sastri’s leading supporters in a drive for funds and was on a committee set up for the establishment of Sastri College. Incidently, he was also instrumental in the establishment of the Orient Club in co-operation with Mr. Sastri, the then Agent General for India who emphasized the need for dialogue between White and Indian other than through business contacts and it was thus that the Orient Club became a meeting place for both races to meet over the dinner table and: create better understanding between White and Indian. The same year saw the founding of the Simplex Group of Companies. He has also connected with the affairs of the Orient Club in latter years. The latter became Chairman .of the Club in the sixty’s for three consecutive years, He was also on the Building Committee of the Grey Street Mosque. The third of the sons of Haffe- jee Moosa, joined the firm in 1930 and was concerned with the management of the Port Shepstone branch until 1936. The partnership was dissolved at this stage and Moosa A. H. Moosa branched out into the clothing field. He was joined i this venture by his younger brother Hoosen Mia wt.o remained with him until 1950. Over the jO42 years it became one of the most outstanding and pro- | gressive manufacturing concerns run by Indians in the country. Hajee Moosa continued on his own from this stage onwards and was joined by his two sons, Mehmood and Yusuf. Hoosen Mia in the meantime established an Estate Agency. Hajee Moosa took a keen interest in all Indian activities and in the industrial sector, branched out into the Textile field. He died in 1962 at the age of fifty four. The three sons of Hajee Mahomed Moosa, Yusuf, Ebrahim and Ahmed, each joined the Furniture Group on the completion of their respective schooling at an early age. The eldest, Yusuf M. Moosa, retired from the Group in 1964. The two Retail organisations, Simplex and Victoria, and in the manufacturing field, as True-Art Furniture Manufacturers, are now run by Ebrahim and Ahmed Moosa. The Haffejee Moosa family has been active in almost every field from the early days of its arrival to this day. It has lent its unstinted support to every welfare, cultural, religious and social activity over the last seventy five years. In the Commercial and Industrial sector the family can be truly termed as pioneers in the more complicated field of high finance and investment. lo43 MOOSA, Ismail Amod Haffejee: Eldest son of A. H. Moosa. Died: 1934. lO¢y MOOSA, Mahomed Amod Haffejee: b. 1902, Durban, Natal, South Africa. Second son of A. H. Moosa. Died: 1970.

---

## Page 8

210 yoxs MOOSA, Moosa Amod Haffejee: b. 8th January, 1908. Third son of A. H. Moosa. Died: 1962. Xb MOOSA, Hoosen Mia Amod Haffejee: b. 14th November, 1913. Director of Companies. Educated: Carlisle Street, Marine College and Cathedral John Carmen High School. Bombay. Youngest son of A. H. Moosa. Origin: Thadkeshvar, India. Director: H. A. H. Moosa & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. Land & Estate Agents. Bus. Add.: 418 Victoria Heights — Phone: 20686; Res. Add.: 14 Meerut Road, Westville, Phone: 857279. Married: s 3; D 3. iO%7 MOOSA, Ebrahim Mahomed: Director of Companies. b. 23rd July, 1924, Durban, Natal. Edu.: Carlisle Street and Sastri College. Son of Mahomed A. H. Moosa. Origin: Tadkeshvar, District Surat, India. Joined family concern, 1942. Managing Director of True Art Sales (Pty.) Ltd. and Sub. Co’s. Activities: Chairman: Darul Yatma Wal-Masakeen 1962/71; Secretary: Orient Club; Trustee: Orient Islamic Educational! Inst.; West Street Mosque — Trustee; Treasurer: Tadkeshvar Educational Society and holds posts in various other insts. and orgs. Sports: Tennis and Swimming, Snooker. Travel: Europe, U.K., U.S., M.E. Married: Hawa, daughter of A. H. Moosa of Durban, st D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 286, Durban, Natal — Phone: 318831; Res. Add.: 400 Cato Manor Road, Durban — 884473. jo¥€ ; MOOSA, Yusuf: Businessman. b. ist December, 1938, Durban, Natal. Educated: St. Anthony’s School (Primary). M. L. Sultan Technical College. Son of Moosa A. H. Moosa. Joined family busi- ness — Entreprise Group of Co’s., 1954. Activities: Member Social Organisation: . Muslim Youth Movement; Orient Club. Rec.: Tennis, Weight Lifting and Snookers. Travel: U.K., Europe, THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO‘S WHO M.E., Far East, U.S.A. & Haj: 1964. M: Amina Ahmed, Seedat: Si; D1. Bus. Add.: 100 Commercial Rd., Dbn. Phone66131;Res. Add.: 119 Amlock Drive,Parlcok, Dbn. \o44 MOOSA, Yusuf Mahomed: Businessman. b. 12th Dec., 1922, Durban, Natal. Educated: Carlisle Street and Sastri College. Son of Mahomed A. H. Moosa. Origin: Tadkeshvar, District Surat, India. Was associated with Simplex; True- Art’ Furniture Factory and Victoria Furniture Mart until 1964. Interested in Industrial and Businessman Manage- ment and Public Relations. “Activities: Trustee: Orient Islamic Educational Institution. Travel: East Africa; India, Pakistan, P.E.A., Kenya. Sports: Tennis, Swimming. Married: Amina, daughter of Mrs. and the late Mr. Yusuf Ahmed Mahomed of Kimberley; S 3; D 2. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 4130, Durban, Phone: 27786; Res. Add.: 22 Cactus Lane, Sydenham, Durban — Phone: 888026. 1050 MOOSA, Ahmed Mahomed: Director of Companies. b. 2nd July, 1931, Durban. Educated: St. Anthony’s School. Son of Maho- med Moosa. Joined family manu- facturing concern in 1947. Is production and design head of True Art Furniture Sales (Pty.) Ltd. Also Director — True-Art, Simplex and Victoria Group of Companies and Subsidiaries. Activities: Member: Orient Club. oe Sports: Tennis; Travel: U.K., Europe, P.E.A. Married: $ 2;D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 186, Durban, Natal — Phone: -; Res. Add.: 131 Leander Crescent, Westville, Durban. 109 \ MOOSA, Mahmoud: Businessman. b. 26th September, 1936, Durban, Natal. Educated: Sastri College. Son of Moosa A. H. Moosa. Origin: Tadkeshwar, India. Joined family concern, 1953 — Enterprise Group of Companies. One of well-known Manufacturers of Mens and Boys Clothing in Natal. Also handles American franchise for “Hang Ten”. Activities: Member: Muslim Youth Movement; Orient Club; Chairman: Anjuman Islam (West Street Mosque); Rec.: Snookers. Travel: U.K., Europe, Far East, U.S., M.E., Haj: 1957; Married: Hafiza Cassim Jasat of Pietermaritzburg; Bus. Add.: 100 Commercial Road, Durban — Phone: 66131. Res. Add.: 20 Westborough Road, Westville — Phone: 857423. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The M. H. Moosa Family of Pietermaritzburg OS e Moosa Jan Mahomed, one of the early Indian traders in the Natal capital, arrived in this country in the 90’s and by 1898, had established a retail store in Church Street, the fore-runner to the Moosa Commercial, Property and Industrial empire of today. A shrewd businessman, he was soon breaking out into the Wholesale trade. In 1918, he was joined by his son, Hassim and in 1949, the sons of Hassim Moosa entered the family business. Moosa Jan Mahomed was born in Jodiya, District Jamnagar, India in 1878. He died in 1954 at the age of seventy six. $3 MOOSA, Hassim: Retired Busi- nessman. b. Jodiya, 1896. Arrived in South Africa the same year. Son of Jan Mahomed Moosa. Joined family business, 1918. Laid foundations of present business interests in Land, Estate and Wholesale. Retired since, 1949. Business now run by surviving sons as M. H. Moosa. Limited Liability Co. since 1966. Acts.: Trustee: Hamdany Mosque and Madressa Trust and Islamia School; Northdale Mosque and Madressa Trust. Was instrumental in building the Northdale Mosque complex for the use of the Muslim community of North- dale, Pietermaritzburg; Married: S 4; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 194, 496 Pietermaritz Street, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 54511; Res. Add.: 26 James Street, Pietermaritz- burg, Natal. lo 5% MOOSA, Dawood Hassim: Direc- tor of Companies. b. 10th Nov., 1917. Educated: India and South Africa. Businessman. Eldest son of ; eos Hassim Moosa of Pietermaritzburg. . A < Managing Director of one of Y a Natal’s leading Indian Wholesalers —_ and its subsidiaries:— Bellaplast pv Manufacturing Co. (Pty.) Ltd., Everest Heights Township (Pty.) Ltd., Willowton Oil & Cake Mills. Other Activities: Past Chairman and Trustee: Islamia Musjid & School Trust; Member: Durban and Pietermaritzburg Chambers of Commerce; Chairman: ¢ 277 Northdale Muslim Society. Grantee: Islamia State Aided School. Member: M. L. Sultan Technical College Council; Married: Fathima, daughter of Abdoo} Karim Hoosen of Durban; S 3; D 8; Travel: India, Pakistan, M.E. (Haj). U.K., Europe and the Far East; Bus. Add.: 496 Pieter- maritz Street, Pietermaritzburg — P. O. Box 194 — Phone: 54511; Res. Add.: &1 Royston Road, Mountain Rise Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 24135. \osS> MOOSA, Amod Hassim: Director of Companies. b. 10th Nov., 1920, Jodiya, India. Educated: South Africa. Businessman. Director of M. H. Moosa and subsidiary co’s in the Investment, Manufac- turing and Processing fields. Other activities: Vice President: Islamia Musjid and School Trust; Trustee: Northdale Muslim Society; Mem.: Islamia School Board Education Committee; Member: Paradise Club, Durban. Married: Hanifa, daughter of Essa Dada of Jodiya, India; S 5; D 6. Travel: India, Pakistan, U.K., Europe, M.E. (Haj), P.E.A. and E.A.; Bus. Add.: 496 Pietermaritz Street, Pietermaritzburg — P. O. Box 194 — Phone: 54511. Res. Add.: Flat 13, 496 Pietermaritz Street, Pietermaritz- burg — Phone: 51076. [0S 1 MOOSA, Mahomed Hassam: Di- rector of Companies. b. 6th Nov., 1924, Pietermaritzburg. Business- man. Director of M. H. Moosa and various other subsidiary co’s con- trolled by the Moosa family throughout Natal. Other Acts.: Trustee: Northdale Muslim Soc.; Member: Paradise Club, Durban. Takes a keen interest in all local Social and Cultural activities. Widely travelled. Married: Hawa- bai, daughter of Siddi Akoo of Durban; S 3. Bus. Add.: 496 Pietermaritz Street — P. O. Box 194, Pietermaritzburg, Phone: 54511; Res. Add.: Flat 14, 496 Pietermaritz St., Pietermaritzburg ~ Phone: 23796. os? MOOSA, Ebrahim Hassam: b. 1st June, 1933, P. M. Burg. Edu.: Pietermaritzburg. Youngest son of Hassam Moosa. A popular figure in the local business world. Was a Director of M. H. Moosa and Subsidiaries. Was a Member of the Orient Club, Durban. Married: Hoorbai, daughter of V. M. Jooma of Durban; S 2; D 1. Died: 30th October, 1967.

---

## Page 9

212 \0% MOTALA, Ismail Adam: Businessman. b. 18th July, 1912, Umvoti Poort, Greytown, Natal. Educated: Grey- town, Natal. Educated: Greytown and Sastri College. Son of Adam Mahomed Motala. Joined family concern at 18. The firm of Adam Mahomed was established in 1915. It became a Limited Liability Co. in 1943, when the designa- tion “& Sons” was added to the name, Mr. Motala is a Trustee and Treasurer of the Greytown Mosque and Madressa Trust. Married: Daughter of I. E. Bawa. Rec.: Angling and Hunting; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1, Ahrens, Phone 1; Res. Add.: Ahrens — Phone: 1. \0SA MOTALA, Moosa Saleh: Book- keeper — Insurance Agent and Company of Secretary. b. 8th December, 1937, Dundee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. School and High. Fellow of the Institute of Bookkeepers. Son of Saleh M. Motala of Dundee. Partner in family business established, 1942. One of early Bookkeeping Busi- nesses in Dundee — Commercial Agencies. Public Activities: Sec.: Dundee Young Men Muslim Insti- tute; Com. Mem.: Dundee I.C.W. Society; Mosque and Madressa Islamia Trust; Hon. Auditor: Dundee Col. School, Dundee Govt. Indian School, Dundee Tennis Club. Is a Director of Thornley Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Married: Hawa, daughter of Mrs. and Mr. (Late) A. H. Amra; S 1; D 1; Bus. Add.: 46 Wilson Street — Phone: 292; Res. Add.: 32 Ann Street, Dundee — Phone: 292, Dundee, Natal. 0 © MUDALY, Kistarsamy “Bob”: Businessman. b. 18th December, 1922, Cedara, Natal. Educated: Cato Manor Indian School. Son of Ramsamy “Ghandi” Mudaly. “Bob” — Director of Company — K. M. Constructions (Building), Peacerale Poultry Farm (Drummond), Lagoon Transport (Durban). Remarkable progress in business field. Established since 1900. Takes interest in various charitable organisations — F.O.S.A.; LC.W.S.; Natal Indian Blind Society; Community Chest. Activities: Active Boxer during War years and Active Golfer — South African Open and Natal. Bachelor. Rec.: Travel. Bus. Add.: 475 P. M. Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal — Phone: 25217; Res. Add.: Flat 3, 192 East Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. \ob\ MOTILAL, Beharidas: hha Eat b. 15th July, 1921. Delareyville, Lichtenburg, Transvaal. Educated: V. B. High School, Gujarat, India. Son of Motilal Karsandas. Origin: Sunav, India. Entered business scene, 1942 — Laxmi Agencies. Established Laxmi Wholesale, 1956. Export and Import Merchants. Also runs Supermarket. Keen student of Religion. Studied X-ty up to the age of eight, India, 1929. Took up Yoga from that stage onwards. Studied all reli- gions from 1939. Lectured on various major religious beliefs. Activities: Takes a keen interest in all public matters. Has met most religious leaders, swamis, yogis and fakirs. Is a healer of some reknown. Travel: Has visited most of the Religious Shrines all over the world. Rec.: Cricket, Badminton, Volley-ball. Is also an exponent of Yoga. Married: Nirmala, daughter of Bhailulbhai Lakha- bhai Patel of India. $4; D 2. Bus. Add.: 50d Commissioner Street, Johannesburg — Phone: 8387318; Res? Add.: 7-8th Avenue/West, Township, Lenasia. Phone: 171, Lenasia. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA le abaatt WHO'S WHO \o MULLA, A. H.: Attorney-at-Law, b. Greytown, Natal. Educated: Greytown and Sastri College, Wits. University. Son of Ismail Mulla. First Indian to qualify for the B.A. L.L.B. Degrees in S.A. First S.A. Indian to enrol at Wits. Was head prefect at Sastri College. Qualified as an advocate. Now practising as Attorney in Natal Provincial Divi- sion. Past Secretary: Law Students Society; Was Member: Liberal Party — N.C.R., University De- bating Society; Secretary: Int. Re- Jations Study Circle; First Non- European to represent the University at N.U.S.A.S., Cape Town (1938). Was connected with the N.I.O. and the Orient Club. Married: Fathima, daughter of I. D. te tie of Dannhauser. Add.: Lodson House, Grey Street, urban. jo@3 MULLA, Yusuf Suleman: b. 25th June, 1907, Durban. Educated: Higher Grade School and Carlisle Street. Son of Suleman Mulla. Origin: Kathor, India. In the Retail trade between 1922-45. Was’ with the Enterprise Group of . 3’s,, until 1938. Manager: Darul. — Yatma of Durban from same year: Full-time welfare worker. Began as League refree in 1938 — Intex- town and Zone, over the years. Activities: President: Durban bie Refrees Association; Patron: Dur- ban ll Association; Treasurer: S. Natal Refrees Board. Manager of Darul Yatma Wal-Masakeen. Sports: Soccer, Tennis. Married: Khatija Hoosen Vahed;$ 1;D 1. Bus. Add.: 341 Pine Street, Durban — Phone: 69090. Res. Add.: it 7, 207 Warwick Avenue, Durban — Phone: 349391. ree loe*® MOTTIAR, Hajee Amod Ismail: Businessman. b. 7th Dec., 1921, Ranavav, Kathiawad, India. Edu.: Ranavav and Bree St. Govt. Sch. Son of Ismail Tayob Mottiar. Oldest business in Vereeniging and Johannesburg since 1936. A. I. Mottiar — General Dealers. Act .: Executive © Mcmber: Memon Association. Takes a keen. interest in all local activities. Re Sports and Music. Travel; M.:.. India, Pakistan, Aden, East Africa. Married: Fathima, daughter of Mcosa Cassim of Haartbceste- fontein; S 3; D 4. Bus. Add.: 5c Claim Street, Hospital Hall, Johannesburg — Phone: 351661. Res. Add.: 17-13th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Transvaal. ad Tran. at ee THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO FEI EE, PELE KE locs” The family settled in South Africa in 1888 — the first comer being Hajee Hassim Moti who was born in Ranavav in 1874. He landed in Durban and after a brief stay continued to Pretoria where he established the first of his busi- nesses. He was amongst the early pioneers who spread out into the Transvaal. In 1898 he moved to Pietersburg where he began trading in the wholesale and retail fields as well as the lucrative property market under the Hassim Moti & Civmpany. He took a keen interest in all local activities and w_; a Trustee of the Pietersburg M. Mosque Trust and also held the position of Chairman of the Pietersburg Indian Community. He donated freely to various charjtable organisations in Pietersburg and elsewhere. The local hospital benefitted largely from his benevolence. He performed Haj as early as 1903 and in India, he was secretary of the Ranavavy Anjuman Islam as well as its Life Member and Trustee. He died in Pietersburg in 1943 at the age of sixty nine. joGG HAJEE, Mohamed Hajee Hassim Moti: Director of Com- panies. b. 1911. Educated: Ranavav, Pietersburg Convent School. Son of Hajee Hassim Moti. Entered his father’s business in 1927 and later started his own business in 1927 and later started his own business in 1931 as Japan Bazaar and later to P. B. Bazaar as a bicycle dealer. In 1934 the business of Cycle Dealer was extended to Used Motor Cars as well. Rejoined father’s business in 1939 alt “inl 1950 obtained a trading licence as a motor dealer * on." parage and staiced the business of Moti’s Motors & Mer ot e Works. Presently adm. business of Moti’s Motors, na Furnishers and the new land investments of the iily. Activities: Trustee: Pietersburg (Muslim) Moham- redan Mosque Trust Congregation for several years. Rec.: seligion, Mysticism and General Literature. Married: Juleika G. M. Kalla; S 4; D 4. Bus. Add.: 37 Market St., »Pietersburg — Phone: 5418; Res. Add.: 35 Joubert St., “etersburg — Phone: 5418. 213 YE HEH HE HB HEHE HE BABE II I HEHE IB HE HEE HB HEHEHE HB HE HH BR HEB HHH RO BE RE BRIE II BH HI BI HS x The Moti Family of Pietersburg x IRIE IA IKI PL HEH BEER HEBBEN NOEHEHE I BIB BI BHD BH HE HEHEHE HB BB BB BB BBB HE HOE EHH BE Bk BORO I BHO BK ID BBB RAR RK AAA i067 ABDUL, Aziz M. Moti: b. 6th July, 1935 at Pietersburg. Educated: Pietersburg and Pietersburg Anglican Mission College. Eldest son of Mohamed Moti of Pietersburg. Entered business scene 1953 — family concern — Moti’s Motors. Director — property interests and investments of family in the Republic. Sports: Cricket, Tennis and Soccer. Married: Fathima, daughter of E. N. Ayob of Pretoria; s 3. Travel: Europe, U.K., India, Pakistan, M.E. U.S.A., Canada and African countries. (068 CASSIM, Moti: b. 23rd December, 1938 at Pietersburg. Educated: Pietersburg Primary and Johannesburg High School. Second son of Mohamed Moti of Pietersburg. Entered business scene, 1961 — family concern — Moti’s Motors. Director/Manager of family division — Nirvana Furnishers. Sports: Travel: India, Pakistan; Married: Bilkis, daughter of Aboo Tayob of Middleburg; D 1. 1064 HAROUN, Moti: b. 20th February, 1940. Educated: Pietersburg Primary and Johannesburg High School. Third son of M. Moti. Entered business scene 1960 — family concern — Moti’s Motors. Director/Manager — Family Motor Division — Moti’s Motors. Activities: Trustee: Pietersburg Mosque Trust. Sports: Tennis, Cricket, Soccer, Travel: Swaziland, P.E.A., Married: Rashida, daughter of Hajee Moosa Cassim of Johannesburg; D 1. oto ABDOOL, Razack M. Moti: b. 17th September, 1942 in Pietersburg. Educated: Pietersburg Primary and High School, Wits, M.B. B.Ch. (1966). Joined hospital staff — Bharagwanath — Johannesburg — 1967/68. Canada — Beech Clinic; Toronto (1969/70); Returned to South Africa, 1970. Became F.C.P. (South Africa), same year. Now attached to Cardiac Unit — Wentworth Hospital. Travel: Widely — Varied interests; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Tennis.

---

## Page 10

214 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO‘S WHO The A. D. Mottiar Family of Johannesburg \o7\"| The first of the Mottiar’s, Dada Khan Mahomed, arrived in this country in 1885 and settled in Durban where: he worked for the then well-known firm of Dada Abdulla. The premises were situated on the site occupied by Harvey Greenacres today. He returned to India in 1888 and rejoined the family business in the stone masonry trade. The local quarry produced the type of stone commonly used by monumental masons. He did not return to this country again but persuaded his three brothers to emigrate to South Africa. The eldest of the brothers arrived here in 1906. Anmed Dada Khan Moha- med settled in Pretoria for a short while and moved to Middleburg where he worked for a number of years, returning to Pretoria in 1910 and then continuing to Pietersburg where he remained until 1924. The present business of Import-Export agency was established the same year when the family eventually settled in Johannes- burg, Transvaal. io Vk MOTTIAR, Ahmed Dada: Busi- nessman. b. 15th June, 1893, Ranavav, Saurastra, India. Edu.: Ranavav School and Madressa. Salesman, Manager and Commer- cial Traveller, Ahmed Dada Mottair established Mottiar’s Commercial Agency, 1924 and in 1926, opened a wholesale division and by 1935, had branched out into the manu- facturing field at Pietersburg as Capital Clothing Manufacturers. The factor transferred its interest to Johannesburg the following year. Takes a keen interest in all local.activities and was a former member of the T.I.C. Widely travelled, he has toured the U.K., Europe, India, Pakistan and various other countries. Married: Mariam Ayub Kurtha; S 6; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 7439, 50 Commissioner Street, Johannes- burg — Phone: 8342639; Res. Add.: 30 Diagonal Street, Johannesburg, Transvaal. \o1% MOTTIAR, Iqbal Ahmed: Direc- tor of Companies. b. 1ith July, 1939, Johannesburg. Educated: i> Bree Street and Johannesburg High b ” School. Is a Director of Mottiar’s \o7% MOTTIAR, Abdul Haque: Busi- nessman. b. 15th March, 1933, Johannesburg. Educated: Johan- nesburg Indian High. Director of Companies. Managing Director of Mottiar Watch Industries Lt (1966); Also connected with A. Bogs Jewellers Ltd. Amalgamated Trade Ltd. Member: Rotary Club Ndola. Rec.: Tennis, Golf, Squash and Badminton; Married: § 1; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 2061, Ndola. Phone: 4864; Res. Add.: 16 Kil Jarney Road, Ndola. os” se MOTTIAR, Farouk Ahmed Dr.: Medical Practitioner. b. Johannes- burgr Housemanship at King Ed- ward VIII. Fourth son of Ahmed Mottiar. joe MOTTIAR, Rafique Ahmed: Stu- dent. b. 11th July, 1945, Johan- nesburg. Student at Dublin Uni- versity, Ireland. Rec.: Swimming, Tennis and Music. 1077 MOTTIAR, Abdul Aziz Ahmed: Director of Companies. b. 21st February, 1947, Johanmesburg. Educated: Bree Street, Roode- poort and Lenasia. Is a Director in family business. Interested in all sports, architecture and chess. di |o13 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Dat The Perthab Mungal Family of Ottawa lo74 Jhugroo was born in U.P., India. After ten years in the service of the Campbells as a worker in the cane fields and then as a coachman, he saved enough to buy his own farm at Ottawa which extended over fifty acres. It was here that the Jhugroos began their expansion and activities as farmers. There are many stories about the elder. He was a fine swimmer and it was due to this that the lives of three European children were saved at Umhlanga Rocks years ago. His modesty was such that he rarely spoke of this and of his life and experiences in this country. He was charit- able to a remarkable degree. The Jhugroo School — the original one stood on the Main Road, where there isa bedding factory now, stands as a monument to the man. He set out a piece land for the school and the sons perpetuated his memory by building it. The second school ~ The New Jhugroo School — stands on three acres donated by the family. He was well versed in Hindi and the scriptures. He died in 1935. Mungal, f. eatin gal, father of Perthab, logo MUNGAL, Perthab: Farmer; b. 3rd July, 1921, Ottawa Natal. Educated: Verulam Govt. Aided School. Son of Mungal and grandson of Jhugroo. Is a successful farmer in the Ottawa area, Sole proprietor of Ottawa Sand Supplies which also includes a Transport section. Promin- ent member of Local Indian Comm.; Vice President: Verulam Clinic Board, Ottawa Indian School Trust; Chair- man: Ottawa Vedic Society; I.C.W.S. (Ottawa Branch); Member: F.O.S.A.; Patron of vatious sports bodies; Natal Estates Indian Mill Group; Trustee: Jhugroo School; Rec.: Angling and Hunting; Married: Gaithree Garib of Syden- ham, Durban; S 1; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Ottawa, Natal. Phone: 1740; Res. Add.: Ottawa (School Road) — : 1740, Verulam, Natal. oad) — Phone: \os| GAITHREE, Perthab: (Housewife); b. 27th Fe 1930, Sydenham, Durban. Educated: St. Salinas Sydenham. Hindi under Pundit Nardev. Hindi Teacher, (Voluntary) Ottawa, Daughter of Garib of Sydenham. Rec.: Gardening, Sewing, Music and Travel. 5 Commercial Agency. Interest MOTTIAR, Yusuf Ahmed: b. Sound Projection and Music. Johannesburg. Eldest son of Z Mm Married: Farida E. M. Ravalia. Ahmed Mottiar. 215

---

## Page 11

216 KEPT BOE IH FE BE IE IH RI REL LEMIRE ; \oS2 LANKA Muthal arrived in this country in 1895 and was sent to the Burrow Green Estates near Port Shepstone where he worked ris in the Cane fields for the Umzim- kulu Sugar Estates which was the biggest grower of cane in the area. after 10 yrs. in the service of the ‘ 7 Estate he began farming in market | produce in the Port Shepstone ; / area. He was particularly success- ful m tobacco farming and banana cultivation. The present home farm which extends over several acres was purchased in 1945. He was a very out- spoken man and it was characteristic of him to speak his mind at every opportunity. An esteemed and well respect ed figure, people often came to him for solace and advice. The early pioneers who settled in Natal tended to form particular groups which actually began in the homeland and continued in South Africa where this clan-like existence was encouraged and Lanka Muthal was an accepted leader of his clan. Time did not alter his mode of dress just as it could not dent his forthright manner. He continued to don his white turban until his death in 1967 at the ripe age of hundred and four. FEI KIN BEB HAH HHH HE HEHE XE HE EE HEE IE KE BE IK HEHE I HOE HE BH HOE IH RHE A HE EK SEIKI AIA The Lanka Muthal Family of Port Shepstone SERA BAI ETI IL II ADI BX IEE HOCH BX BA ENE SE EE BE SIH BH HETERO IPL IE EE THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO sedan otineeiueateluatesiaiesleaalee’” jos > Port Shepstone, Natal. Educated: Port Shepstone Primary School. Son of V. Lanka Muthal of Sana- veli Andhra State, India and Port Shepstone. Associated with Steyn’s Transport for over twenty years. Also does farming in Port Andhra “Sabha, Port Shepston and Distnet; Treasurer: Umbango United Sports and Social Club; Marburg Indian Ratepayers Association; Was nominated: Marburg Local Affairs Committee by Administrator in Executive — 1967; Vice Chairman: Port Shepstone and District Football Association, Rec.: Tennis and Soccer. Married: Meenachie, daughter of Viraghoo Naidoo; of Scottburgh; S 4; D 6. Bus. Add.: 25 Price Street — Phone: 880 and 777, Port Shepstone; Res. Add.: Lion’s Grove, Marburg, Natal. Y. Lanka Muthal: Senior ci and L.A.C. Born: 16th May, 1914;5= Shepstone area. Activities: Co ee Member: I. C. W. Society; oe MENACHIE, wife of Y. Lanka Muthal. Daughter of Viraghoo Naidoo of Scottburgh, Natal. 10% MUTHALIB, Hajee Abdul: Furniture Manufacturer. b. 4th May, 1905, Overport, Durban. Educated: Islamic Madressa and Higher Grade. Eldest son of Hajee Abdul Kader of Overport, Durban. Followed in fathers footsteps — joined furniture trade and opened own manufacturing business, Stirling Furniture Manufacturers, 1963. Moved to prese premises, 1954. Also Director: Alib Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Keen on social and Islamic*studies. Has travelled widely — Far East, Middle East, Europe, N. Ameri¢a and Scandinavian countries; Haj: 1963/65/68. Rec.: Islamic Literature and Travel. Bus, Add:: 28 and 47 Lome Street, Durban — Phone: 28041/28481; Res. Add.: 37 Sharman Drive, Reservoir Hiils, Durban — Phone: 85629. — re THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIA oa S WHO \ NABY, Ajam: Businessman. b. 12th February, 1912, Chamwood (Blackburn), Verulam. Educated: Umdhloti Govt. Aided School. Son of Naby of Balia, West Bengal, India. Proprietor of A. Naby, General Retailers, established 1944. Director in farming venture, Naby Bros. Farms in the Verulam area since 1928. Vice President: Mt. Edgecombe Indian Mill Group; Member: Mt. Edgecombe Indian Mill Board; Trustee and Treasurer: ES Verulam and _ District Indian ‘il aa School Board; Past Secretary and Treasurer: Verulam Ratepayers Association; Trustee and Executive of numerous estates. Member of I.C.W.S.; Married: Fathima M. Khan; S 1; D 2; Rec.: Literature; Bus. Add.: 15 Moss Street, Verulam Phone: 112; Res. Add.: “Charmwood”’, Verulam, Natal. = \o8 "| SNAIKER, Devagee A.: Teacher; b. Pietermaritzburg, Natal. ; jtated: Pietermaritzburg Girls Primary, Girls High chool, Springfield Teachers Training College. Daughter of Aboo Naiker. Origin: Chengelput, South India. Joined teaching profession in 1955, St. Anthonys. Transferred to M. O. School, 1955. Activities: Past Treasurer: Central Schools Sports Association; Member: Red Cross; Secretary: Girls High School O. G. Club (1956/57); President: Girls 217 High School O. G. Club (1957/69); Member: National Council of Women; Magnus Scouts Group; Captain of the Pietermaritzburg Girl Guides; Organiser: VariousCharitable shows, Debs Ball, under auspices, Girls High School as President: Interested: Hockey, Table Tennis, Tennis, Net- ball, Swimming; Rec.: Travel. Toured Great Britain and Continent (1965/66); Res. Add.: 15 Noordsberg Road, Mountain Rise, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. (cS NADASON, George: Businessman; b. 27th May, 1929, Dannhauser, Natal. Educated: Dannhauser Ind. School. Son of Mathew Nadason of Dannhauser, Natal and Madras, India. Began working at early age. Self-taught Bookkeeper. Moved to Colenso and eventually to Durban. Joined Goodwill Clothing Mnfrs. in 1959 — Administrative Capacity. Now Partner in firm. Director: G. & H. Commercial Agencies. Is a Member of the Bethesda Temple. Takes interest in all Social Activities. Member: Natal Clothing Mnfrs. Association; International Traders Guild, Los Angeles, U.S.A.; Married: Naomi, daughter of George Seekola of Durban; S 1; D 4. Rec.: Soccer, Hobby: Photography; Bus. Add.: 132 Pinedene Road, Rossburgh, Phone: 817328. ee le el ltl lll ea ats The 8. Teo % x x x x x x x bas y x + € \Oa¢ It was in 1904 that the Nadasen’s first settled in this country. Accompanied by his son, thirteen year old Nada- sen, Senassi Thiruvengadan arrived here to begin his work as priest at the ill-fated Umbilo Temple. He was helped in his temple duties by his son. The terrible floods of 1905, when the Umbilo River broke its banks and rendered fo in and around the area, also heralded the death 6y drowning of the temple priest. Senassi Thiru- vengadan’s body was recovered some days later at the Bay. He was born at Mayavarum, Madras Presidency, India, in eld as the Riverside area and Pinetown. 1084 18 '6. His death at theage of forty nine was a sad blow to ye , sands of devotees who flocked to the temple from as fafafi “ NADASEN, Senassi Thiruvengadan: Businessman. b. 1893, Mayavarum, India. Arrived sin South Africa in 1904 and , adasen Family xo Merebank BE SALIENT EH I HE HE IKE after the Umbilo floods, moved to Maritzburg where he remained until 1909. He returned to Durban in the same year and made Merebank his home. Established a laundry and in 1926, opened a wood and coal business to be followed by a Retail store in 1931. The firm of S. T. Nadasen is one of the older established businesses in the area. Other Activities: Trustee: Merebank Parasathe Tem- ple, Merebank Tamil School Society; Merebank Indian Association; Second River Temple. Patron: Clairwood Temple Institute. Responsible for the setting up of the first Indian School in the Merebank area. Interested in Religious Studies. Married: Amunakan Subraya Govender; S 6; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 5, Merebank, Natal. Phone: 87151, Durban; Res. Add.: 114/116 Tomango a Merebank, Natal.

---

## Page 12

218 , The K. P. Naicker Family of Port Shepstone IOAo THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Born in the year 1860, Kisten Naicker arrived in this country in 1895 after serving on board a sailing vessel, which plied between Natal and India, for over ten years. The last voyage was a romantic one. Kisten fell in love with Parvathy Naicker who was on her way to South Africa. Shortly after the ship berthed in Durban they were married. He werked in the harbour area for some years as a signaller and eventually settled in the Malvern district as a banana planter. He died in 1909. Perumal was the second son of Kisten Naicker. He was born in Malvern in 1902. The death of the father so early in their lives meant a constant struggle for survival. Perumal’s laundery career began at the age of eighteen. By the year 1931, three years after an early marriage, the first step was taken in setting up his own Dry-cleaning business in Newcastle. The family moved to Charlestown a year later and as Naicker’s Steam Laundery carried on business for over ten years on the border. In 1949, Perumal finally moved to Port Shepstone where the business, Elite Dry Cleanders, established itself as the largest and most up-to-date Indian owned dry cleaning concern on the South Coast. There are four children in the Naicker family. Vasudevan (Roy), manages the Dry-cleaning establishment. Thandevan is a B.A. stu- dent while Ambiga, the eldest daughter, is 4 Welfare Officer. eminem \oAl NAICKER, Mariemuthoo: Princi- pal. b. 28th September, 1925, Port Shepstone, Natal. Educated: Port Shepstone Govt. Indian Sch.; Qualifications: B.Com.; N.C.D.; N.T.D.; A.LCo. Sec. (S.A.). Present Head of the Stanger Branch of the M. L. Sultan Tech. College (since 1966). Previously attached to the Pietermaritzburg Branch of the M. L. Sultan Tech- nical College as Vice-Principal (1962/66). Dedicated student — early days. By dint of hardwork & strength of character has reached the top in his profession. Was factory worker, page-boy, waiter, wine-steward, clerk and bookkeeper at various stages. Matriculated over this period of stewardship. En- rolled as part-time student at Natal University and. ob- tained B.Com. with First Class passes in Accounting I & Il. Was first Non-European student to pass Accounting Ill at University. Activities: Past Treasurer: Natal Indian Lawn Tennis Association; David Landau Community Centre; Private Secretary: Durban Indian Lawn Tennis Club. Served at a number of schools under N.E.D. up to 1957. Was full-time lecturer at M. L. Sultan Technical College from 1958. Also part-time lecturer up to Diploma grade. Sports: Tennis and Table Tennis. Rec.: Travel. Toured Britain and the Continent in 1965. Was awarded British Council Bursary to study Technical Education in England in 1965. Married: Rookmoney Pillay; S 3; Add.: 2 Victory Road, Stanger — Phone: 512, Stanger; Res. Add.: 19 King George Road, Stanger, Natal. NAICKER, Kistasammy, Rungasammy: Businessman. b. Ist February, 1930, Inanda, Natal. Educated: Moonsamy School, Inanda. Son of K. R. Muthoo Naicker of Inanda. Origin: Madras, india. Cafe Owner and Retailer on Old Main Road, Tongaat. Known as Naicker’s Trading Store and Cafe. Previously fro’ Inanda. Established business in Tongaat, 1962. Member: Tongaat Indian Ratepayers Association. Interested in all local activities. Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Angling. Married: Govindamma, daughter of M. Moonsamy of Avoca; S 2; D 3, Bus. Add.: P. O, Box 155, Tongaat — Phone: 155; Res. Add.: Old Main Road, Tongaat — Phone: 155. [o97 NAICKER, Moonsamy Arumu- gum: -Printer. b. 1Sth August, 1917, Umzinto, Natal. Edu ood: St. Annes Convent, Umzinto. Son of Manicum Naicker, early pion- eer — retail trade — Umazinto. Origin: Kanjipur, Madras, India. Well-known Farmer and Busines man. Was in Transport Business originally - 1944/67. Began print- ing press, 1963 ~ Umzinto Print- ing Press. One of leading members of Tamil Community. Religiously inclined. Activities: Trustee and Chairman: Vishnu Temple — Um- zinto (1963/68); Trustee and Secretary: S. S. Temple — Umbelibeli (1951/68). Was previously Secretary: Vishnu Temple; Treasurer. Umzinto Hindu Cemetery Board, 1962/68; Member: Indian Ratepayers Association; Treas.: Umzinto Indian Boy Scouts Movement. Réc.: Amate Dramatics. Took active part™in local vernacular shows. Married: Aubruby, daughter of Nadasen Naicker of Inverugic; S 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 66, Umzinto, Natal. Phone: 13; Res. Add.: Unbeliseli, Umzinto — Phone: 1%. % = t i ad 1\0%> THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO NAICKER, Nacharamma: Teach- er. b. Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: Methodist, Woodlands and Girls’ High Schools. Eldest daughter of Late G. Naicker. Com- menced teaching at E. P. School in 1941. Also taught vernacular at H.Y.M.A., Pietermaritzburg. Also taught at St. Pauls, Islamia and St. Anthony’s School. Acts.: Member: N.I.T.S. Joined Guide Movement as Captain of E.P.S. Guide Company. Appointed Dist. Camp for Pietermaritzburg Indian Guides in 1958. Was first female reasurer for Pietermaritzburg Indian Technical Student Society and F.O.S.A. of Pietermaritzburg; Care i 1953/58; Vice Chairman: aaah anleune "Suet 1965; H.L.V.P.: Technical Student Society; F/Member: Pietermaritzburg Indian Girl Guides. Spread movement amongst Indians in the city. Del.: Midlands Schools Sports Association; Member: Centenary of Education in Natal, 1949; Pietermaritzburg Indian Sports Sub Com 1969; Member: National Arts and Crafts Exhibition; Sub. Committee; Committee Member: Indian Century Com F 4960. Travel! Toured Union 1949, Rhodesia and Lourenco Marques, 1952, India 1958. Attended World Guide and Scout Jamboree in Bombay. Met Lady B. Powell, 1950 and 1970 (World Chief Guide). Toured World in 1971 Awarded long Service Medal in Guiding, 1963. Add.: 16 Thomas Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. F 219 1 14 NAICKER, Perumal Aboo: School ~ Teacher. b. 8th Se : .b. ptember, 1910, + Durban, Natal. Educated: Umgeni School and Carlisle Street, Dur as Eldest son of Aboo Aerie he Durban. On teaching staff — Illovo me Fg. Illovo area in educational field. ‘ Set up first private school at Illovo ~~ in 1930 with about fifty pupils. Increased to over 100 by 1950 . when the mew school was opened : in ‘1951. Was only teacher of this unique school — Class I and Std. VI. Activities: Was first Chairman: (Illovo); Member: Indian Blind Societ : h t y, Durban; Member: aes oe Society, Durban; Member: Indian oa pies Prabtae Interests: Soccer. Also on Refrees eee 7 lovo Football Association and Middle South — : fete ee Vice President and Patron: Middle ; u is oast Football Association. Married: Gengamma Pret cia | of Late V. M. Pillay of Durban; S 2;D 1 Bus. .: Illovo State Aided Indian School, Illovo; Res.: State Aided School. Pioneer in Local Branch ~ Illovo LC.W.S.; Indian Welfare Society IWovo — Phone: 02 — 3973 Amanzimtoti, Natal. The Sellapan = |ois G. Naicker Family. of P.M. Burg ~ . Sellapan Govindsamy Naicker was i India, in 1885 and arrived in this MT 1906 onc settled in the Mooi River area where he saw service with the Tomlinson’s who farmed in the area. An ardent worker _.. . ie religious Tield, he was well versed in the ceremonial and conducted ceremonies and weddings during the early part of the century. He had an early training in these activities and was educated in the yernacular in India. He = was much in demand as a scribe-few people in the comm ” knew how to read or write in those days. In cultural! activities, he was in the forefront as a dramatist and produced and took part in amateur dramatics in the the Capital. The old plays and dramas of the Indian stage were brought to life in this country as early as the first world war and even éarlier. Active in temple matters he war a chairman of the H.Y.M.A. and the Soobramanian and Mariaman Temple“for some years. He was also a chair- ‘man of the Sivasithanda and was with this body for over sixty years. Fond of travel, he toured the Re ic visited India in 1963. He died on the 22nd Feat bee at the age of eighty three. As a Farmer, Business Religious Leader, Pioneer Transport Driver Intellectual and Dramatist, he had few peers in this country: 4 G NAICKER, Govindsamy Soobiah: Senior Assistant Teacher. b. 28th January, 1923 at Pietermaritzburg. Educated: Methodist & Woodlands High. Joined teaching profession 1947. Now at Methodist State Aided School. Past Activities: Past Secretary and Treasurer: P. M. Burg Indian Lawn Tennis Club (1942/56); Hon. Life Vice Pres.: M. L. Sultan Technical College (1957/60); Past Chairman and rari P. M. Burg Scouts ssociation (1942/62); Eff, Award; Scout — Wood Badge. Asst. isis Gan chief for South Africa (First Indian) 1963/69; Rep. S Africa ~ 11th World Jamboree held at MarAthon Gaaces (1963). Commissioner: South African Red Cross (1943/ 58). Re-elected 1969. Holder: 15 year Eff. Medal; Gold Medal ~— Home Nursing and First Aid; Po lnireacy Male Nurse ~ Lakhi’s Ward — Greys Hospital. Organized Centenary Celebrations — 1860 Settlers ~— 1960. Azalea Festival (Indian Section); Blood Donors 1946/59; Scouts: Mayoress and Rover — Christmas H isi ayoress ampers (Raising and Distributing). War Service: Warden in charge of eat Add and Fire Fighting Squad. First South African Indian to rep. South African Scouts at 19th World Scouts Conf. Rhodes (1963); Vice President: Siva Soobramanian and “Ma-Riaman Temple — 1969/71 f i Pictermaritzburg, Natal. Lae

---

## Page 13

220 10a) NAGDEE, Suleman Mahmood: Licenced Diamond Dealer in Lesotho and Freelance Book- keeper. b. 21st June, 1926, Warm- baths, Transvaal. Edu.: Pretoria Intemediary and Johannesburg Indian High. Son of Mahmood Nagdee. Origin: Kacholi, India. Held various official positions in Sports, Welfare and Educational Bodies. Manager: Transvaal Cric- ket Team 1966; Transvaal Selec- tor 1965/66. President: S. Eastern Transvaal Cricket Union, 1960/64; Secretary: Bank Indian School] Educational Comm., 1968/ 70; Asst. Secretary: Kacholi Anjuman Islam for several years and Member of Bursary Fund; General: Stayed at Bank from 1950 to 1970 and after successfully negotiating with mines for paying compensation to Indians for their removal from Bank due to subsidence dangers moved to Azadville, 1970. Now takes a keen interest in Azadville affairs. Played Cricket and Soccer for Bank, 1950 to 1970 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Bank and District Muslim Jamaat 1956/1970; H.L.V.P.: Bank Cricket Club; Rec.: Student of Moghul Period of Indian History; Married: Mariam, daughter of Moosa Jassat; S 3; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 36, Robinson, Transvaal; Res. Add.: 58 Anarkali Street, Azadville, Tvl. {ot ¥ NAIDOO, Bungaree Appanah: Sotial Worker. b. 12th May, 1922, Durban. Educated: Sastri College, University of Natal and UNISA. Quals.: B.A. (S.S.); B.A.; B.A. (S.S.) Hons. Regional Social Worker for South African National Council for Child Welfare. Interested in Social Work and Welfare Services, with emphasis on child welfare. Also takes a keen interest in education and related fields. Has contributed several articles on social welfare and on matters affecting the Indian community in South Africa. Other activities: Hon. Secretary: Natal Indian Council for Child Welfare; Natal Indian Education Committee. Exec. Member: Indian Centenary Bursary Trust; Member: R. K. Khan Hospital Advisory Board; Vice President: Umhlatu- zana Township Indian Association; Add.: P. O. Box 128, Durban, Natal — Phone: 315626; Res. Add.: lla - 342 - 36th Street, Umhlatuzana Township. The A. J. Naidoo Family [OAA NAIDOO, Aiyavaroo Jaganaya- kulu: Insurance Broker and Agent. b. August, 1905, Durban. Edu.: Stella Hill and Carlisle Street, Durban. Eldest son of Aiyavaroo Naidoo. Was previously in Fruit Export trade and Retail Produce Merchant. Established A. J. Nai- doo & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. — 1940. General Insurance Agents and Brokers. One of leading members of the Telegu community. Acts. : Past Secretary and President: Andhra Maha Sabha of South Africa (H.L.V.P.); Founder Member and H.L.V.P.: Stella Hill Andhra Sabha; H.L.V.P.: Steila Hiil Indian Rate- payers Association; Comm. Member: Andhra Benefit Society; President: Stelia Hill Indian School Association ; Vice President: South African Hindu Maha Sabha; Past President: Stella Hill Football -Club; Interests: Hindu Philosophy, Religion and Telegu -Literature. Widely travelled — U.S., Canada, U.K. and Europe, the East, Married: Nagamma; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: Andhra House, 43 Leopold Street, Durban — PHone: 68813; Res. Add.: 36 Tarndale Avenue, Asherville, Durban — Phone: 888507. On board the S. S. Pongola were M. N. Naidoo and grand- father M. Ayavatu Naidoo, father of A. J. Naidoo, who arrived here in 1890. M. Ayavaru Naidoo was seventeen years old when he arrived in this country. The family were contracted to the Arbuckle family who farmed along the North Coast. The family hailed from Vizagopatnam, Andhra, India. {10 NAIDOO, Devdas J.: Insurance Agent, b. Durban. Educated: Stella Hill Primary, Sastri College and Natal University — Bachelor of Social Science. Director: A. J. Naidoo & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. — Ins. Agents & Brokers. Dedicated worker in Social and Welfare fields. Activities: Secretary: Aryan Benevolent Home, Durban, Durban Association for the Indian Aged, Sydenham Cultural Inst. Past Secretary: Natal Indian Cripple Care Association (pre- sently Councillor). Council Member: N.LC.R.O. (Social Services). Andhra Maha Sabha of South Africa, -Asherville Maha Sabha, School of South Indian Music, Durban Central Sabha. Was Principal: Aryan Benevolent Home (W.O. 2453). Interests: Photography, Classical Music and Social Welfare. Married: Sulochanna V. L. Naidoo; D 1. Bus. Add.: Andhra House, 43 Leopold Street, Durban — Phone: 68813; Res. Add.: 36 Tarndale Avenue, Asherville, Durban — Phone: 888507. a le: THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S QWH llol NAIDOO, Barthastthy, Rajago- paul “Jar”: Stock Controller. b. 3rd October, 1928, P. M. Burg, Woodlands High. Second son of Rajagopaul “Jack” Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg. Outstanding Sportsman — Soccer, Cricket and Tennis. Has represented P. M. Burg in all codes. Soccer: St. Pauls, Woodlands and Britannia F/C (1943/53). Rep. P. M. Burg, N. Natal, Natal (Sam China — 1949, Durban; 1951, P. E.). Goalkeeper — played in’ South Africa Trials at Curries Fontain. Cricket: Rep. P. M. Burg — Captained “A” and “B” at Yarious times. Captained Royals C/C — 4 consec. years in the 50’s. All rounder: R/H Batsman 128 nfo — 4 centuries. R/A Fast — 6/30. Tennis: Club: United T/C, Pietermaritzburg and Natal. (Inter-prov.) and Inter-race. Capt. Club (1950), Winner — Club Champion — Singles — 1950/55. Table Tennis: Springbok T/T/C. Winner: Azalea Open Championship — 1949. Other- Activities: Secretary Treasurer and Dei.: M.D.ILC.U. and F.A. —' Royals C/C and Britannia; Secretary and Treasurer: United Tennis Club; Foundation Member: P. M. Burg Table Tennis Associatio.. Was Secretary: Hendry Christian’s School of Physical Culture; Capt. P. M. Burg XI — Inter-race Soccer; Member: Refree Board — P, M. Burg. Rec.: Gardening. Married: Sundree, daughter of Mr, and Mrs. V. R. Padayachee formerly of Port Elizabeth; D 3; Bus. Ad’ : P. O. Box 1299, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. “hone: 426,_; Res. add.: ta Lane, Raisethorpe, ” Pietermaiitzburg, Natal. r 1303 NAIDOO, Shrarmaa Venketsamy: Businessman. b. Ist November, 1931, Richmond, Natal. Edu.: Richmond, Natal. Well-known Richmond Retailer. Is a Director of Midway Restaurant and B. V. Naidoo Stores. Established busi-_ ness in 1958. Dedicated Welfare worker. Activities: Chairman: Richmond I.C.W.S.; Treasurer: Shree Sanathan Veda Dharma Sabha; Member: Divine Life Society; Young Royals C. C. (P. M. Burg); Richmond Indian t ‘ School Education Committee; Patron:.Richmond Indian Sports Club; Member: Richmond Indian C. C. Recently elected to L.A.C. Was previously pointed to L.A.C., Adm. in Exec. Also served on Festival of the Soil Comm., 1966. Rec.: Music and Travel. Married: Efliama E. P. Reddy; S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. . Box 46, Richmond, Natal — Phone: 160; Res. Add.: » Nelson Street, Richmond, Natal. | 1 5 NAIDOO, Balakrishna L.: Principal. .b. 29th July, 1927, i cated: Depot Road School and Sastri _ a wag pe aa Bag re of Asherville, Durban. ~ Began full-time (N.T.S.C. and N.T. Diploma) teaching in 221 1952; Previously attached to the Department of Health — 1947/50). Joined St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, 1946 as Locum Tenens. Qualified as teacher in 1952 and was posted to various schools amongst which Vishwaroop, Tongaat Junior, Amatijulu, Umdhloti and eventually, Tongaat High. Promoted to Principal, 1963, -at Paddock. As Principal to R/Ramnathan School — Cronbrook — 1965. Associated with various sports bodies in Tongaat area from 1948 to 1962. Rep. Durban Football Association against Pietermaritzburg, 1946, at Soccer. Participated in atheletics — Natal Championships 1941/44. Member: Durban Surf-Life-Saving Club; Rec.:, Travel; Married: Angelay, daughter of R. S. Naidoo of Umhlatuzana, Durban; § 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 608, Stanger, Res. Add.: Cranbrook, Stanger — Phone: 1440, Stanger. loo NAIDOO, Coopasamy Papa: Secretary of Companies. b. 27th June, 1927, Blackburn, Mt. Edge- combe, Natal. Educated: Ottawa and Mt. Edgecombe Schools. Son of Papa Naidoo of Blackburn, Mt. Edgecombe and Paramathi, Mad- ras Presidency, India. One of the younger set in Public Affairs. Popular. Activities: Past Treas.: Verulam Cape Com. of F.O.S.A.; Umdhloti Cemetary Society; Past Secretary: Verulam Child Welfare Society (Presently Finance Secre- tary); Trustee: Verulam Deepavali Bursary Trust; Secretary: Verulam Deepavali Union; Vice Chairman: Umdhloti Cemetary Society; Member: Veru- lam Town Board; P/Alternate Member: Verulam Local Affairs Com.; Past Member: Verulam Civic Association; Treasurer: Verulam Indian School Board; Committee Member: Verulam Ratepayers Association; Rec.: Garden- ing; Married: Atchamma Naidoo, Mayville, Durban. D 5. Bus. Add.: 14 Moss Street, Verulam — Phone: 221; Res. Add.: 24 Adams Road, Verulam — Phone: 200. }O4 NAIDOO, Govindsamy Rama- samy: Editor and Writer. b. 1894, Pondicherry, India. Eldest son of G. Naidoo. Arrived here in 1905 and settled in the Durban area. Connected with the printing trade ti from 1929. Became Editor of “The .% Indian Light”, later ‘‘The Sentamil = Silvan”. Published numerous Reli- Ke gious and Tamil works, “Birth of : Siva”, “Explan.”° on Divali”, “Tai ? Poosan”’, ‘‘A Short Hindu Prayer”, “The Tamil Alaphet”, “Goddess Mariamasan”, etc. Was in the fore- front of Tamil Cultural and Literary activities and rendered yeoman sé@fice to the promotion of the Tamil language and Literature. Was an authority and lecturer of note in Tamil. Married: M. Sivagamee, daughter of C.S. Pillay, ‘a S.A.R. Senior Interpreter.

---

## Page 14

222 yor 0% THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO OG The Cc. A. Naidoo Bros. of Groutville The first of the Naidoos of Groutville came to this country in 1910 and was attached to the Illovo Sugar Estates on the Natal South Coast. Chinthal married early in India and together with his wife, who was also under contract, the couple spent the longest five years of their lives in Illovo. Later they moved to Chakaskraal where friends of the couple had settled. The conditions of work at Chakaskraal were better and after some years in the fields Chinthal was attached to the Milf where he remained until his death in 1935 at the age of forty five. The eldest of the sons was Appalsamy who was born at Illovo in 1913. He was educated at Tinley Manor and at an early age joined the firm of A. P. Naidoo & Co. of Tinley Manor, who were pioneers in the area. A resourceful young man, Appalsamy took up Bookkeeping in his spare time and over theycars did the books of firms and individuals to supplement his income. Hardworking, honest and responsibl- Appalsamy rose to the position of manager of the fir 12a position he held until he left the firm in 194 ! together in partnership with his brother, he toos cus, n business in Groutvilic consisting of a butchery and. tea- room. In 1955, C. A. Naidoo Brothers established itself as General Retailers in the area and moved into new a.* modern premises. Phe Company took over another trading store in the district and began business under the name of “Cumbro” Trading Company. He was a well-liked figure, in the area. His Zulu name, “Mfanamdala”, came from his early days with A. P. Naidoo and Company when change of staff was a regular matter and he was about the only one who stood for some permanency. He died in 1967 at the age of fifty tour. “Chin” Naidoo, brother of Appal- samy, was born on the 10th August, 1922. Educated at Chakas Kraal, he began working early and after joining the firm of A. P. Naidoo Ltd. of Stanger with whom he was associated for five years, he left for Port Shepstone, where he joined his brother at Groutville and formed the C. A. Naidoo Brothers Company which he now manages in association with his nephew, Balakrishna. Married: Lutch- mee, daughter of Dan Naidoo of Stella Hill, Durban: S 2; D 2. Res. Add.: Chakas Kraal. Bus. Add.: Groutville Phone: 1404. = * W\ THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO NAIDOO, Chinnasamy Rajago- paul: b. 16th November, 1883. Took a prominent part in every political, cultural and _— social activity of the Indian people in South Africa. He established the Indian Temple in Dundee in 1910 and was also instrumental in the founding of the first Indian school at Merebank. He cham- pioned the cause of Indentured Indians in Natal as carly as 1900 and it was due to his efforts that their grievances were ventilated. He also fought for the removal of the pound tax where it concerned Indian women and children. He attended the 1909 Indian National Congress at Lahore under the presidency of Pundit Malaviya and was the seconder of the motion to stop further Indian immigration to this country moved by Hon. G. K. Gok- hale. He also made strong representation to the India Govt. to bring pressure to bear on the Union govt. to increase the bonus of R10,00 offered to repatriated Indians. He was the writer and chief objector in letters to Lord Reading on the grievances of Indians abroad under Indentured System. He has been the patron of the Tamil Institute since its inception. A close associate of Mahatma Gandhi, he was the second Indian to be detained during the Passive Resistance struggle the first was Mahatma Gandhi himself. He was the only Indian to oppose the re-patriation of Indians to India and spear-headed the Anti- Repatriation Movement in South Africa and had to spend some time in India and succeeded in his attempts to end this scheme. Add.: Orient Lodgt»Cravenby Estate, Elsics River, Cape Town. z, fn 4 the NAIDOO, Govindsamy Coopsamy: Businessman. b. 7th November, 1924, Durban, Natal. Educated: St. Pauls and Woodlands High. Son of Peter Govindsamy Naidoo of Durban. Progressive Businessman of Pietermaritzburg. Ran Dry-Cleaning and Shoe Repair Scawice Super Dry Cleaners and Super Shoe Repair Serviee (Established in 1961). Now in Pretoria Building Contractor. Activitics: Played rep. Soccer for Natal and South Africa. Was sclect- ed for ill-fated India tour. Played rep. Soccer in Natal, both Sunday and Saturday Leagues. Patron: Young Cols. and Royals F/C; Capt.: Inter-race teams. Captained Natal against West Province, Captained Dons,.\*ive-a-Side Com- petition. Winners Natal VFive-a-Side (1949). Played for Springboks, Sunday League. Rece.: Religious Piteruture. Married: Kanagambal, daughter of Late R. R. Pillay (Tiger). $4; D 2. Add.: Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. 3 NAIDOO, Gopaul G.: Businessman. b. 4th November, 1935, Colenso, Natal. Educated: Umzinto High School. Son of Vic. G. Naidoo, well-known Natal and Northern Natal. Sportsman and Businessman of Colengo. Activities: Is a Manager of family concern of V. G. Naidoo, Retailers and Fresh Produce Dealers, Established in the year 1916, is one of the pioneering families and business concerns in ie 223 the area. Has rep. Natal Northern at Cricket and began initially from school to Senior League, Colenso, Estcourt, Ladysmith. Played Soccer for Colenso. Plays for Orientals C. C. of Ladysmith. Is Local Secretary: Colenso Indian School Advisory Board. Takes interest in all Local Affairs. Also in Hotel Trade. Rec.: Travel; Married: Logambal, daughter of C. G. Pillay of Edendale, Pietermaritzburg ; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 18, Colenso — Phone 13; Res. Add.: Wasbank Hotel, Wasbank. Wg. NAIDOO, Govindsamy, Narayand: b. 21st April, 1899 at Kimberley, C.P.; Educated: Prescod School, Kimberley. Son of Sobrayalu Naidoo. Origin: Trichnapoli, South India. Joined firm 1919 — Convent Gardens Stores. Established Convent Gardens Ice Cream Factory — 1940. Gave evidence in all Group Areas deliberations in Kim- berley. Activities: Trustee: Sam China Cup; Was President: Cape Indian Organisation, 1962. Was appointed Exec. Member: S.A.LC. and on the Exec. of Anti T. B. Associa- tion in 1965. Also on the Exec. of the Social Service Centre, Kimberley. Donated Hindu Temple for use of the Hindu Community in Kimberley 1946. Built a library for the Community in 1948 in memory of M. K. Gandhi. Married: Jodambal S. R. Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; D 2. Bus. Add.: De Beers Road, Kimberley — Phone: 4121. Res. Add.: 51 Wareen Street, Kimberley ~— Phone: 4636. Wis NAIDOO, Govindsamy, Venget- samy: Retired Principal. b. 2nd May, 1892, P. M. Burg, Natal. I:ducated: Higher Grade Indian School (P.M. Burg). Son of Govindsamy Naidoo. — Origin: Kanjivaram, Andhra State, South India. Joined teaching profession in 1912. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Provinee. Sports: Captain: Higher Grade C/C (1928); Captain: Stanger, at Soccer and Cricket; Captain: N.I.T. XI on tour of S. A. (1930). Rep. P. M. Burg, N. District, Durban at Cricket. Founder: N.C.F.A. (1922); Co- Founder and President: Pietermaritzburg Indian Lawn Tennis Club and Natal Indian Tennis Association (1928); President: N.LT.S. (1934/36); Vice President: N.LT.S. (1937/69); Natal Indian Eistedfodd; Was President: N. Uducational Centenary Com. Cels. (Presided over eighty schools); Chairman: Indian School Childrens Relicf Com. (Durban and District); Chairman: Pinetown Indian Rate- payers Association (1952/69); Patron: Pinetown L.T.C.; Councillor: H.Y.M.A. Interested in IC.W.S. Matters; Council and Exec. Mem.: Divine Life Society of South Africa; Chairman: Pinetown Indian Hospital Committee. Incharged @f refugee camp 1949 Riots. Retired in 1952. Taught for over fifty two years, Sports: Soccer, Cricket, Tennis, Athictics. Rec.: Golf. Married: Mooniamah, d/o C. Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: 24 “Old Main Road, Pinetown — Phone: 76042.

---

## Page 15

224 | & NAIDOO, Govindsamy, Patcoman: Businessman; b. 5th December, 1929, Dundee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. Indian School, Woodlands High. Son of P. Naidoo. Joined family concern Kristy & Co. — 1946. Director. Well- known market agents. Also connected with New Holmes Hotel — Director. Public spirited — keen in all matters affecting welfare of community. Activities: Soccer: Pat- ron: Y. Nats F/C; Y. Nats C/C; Tennis: Secretary: United Tennis Club (1949/50); Committee Member and Vice Chairman: Shri Vishnu State Aided Indian School — School Fund Committee; Shri Vishnu State Aided Indian School Educational Committee; Member: Eddels Sports Club. Sports: Tennis, United T/C (1942/69); Rec.: Cricket, Soccer, Travel. Married: Pushpavanie, daughter of A. P. Govender of Newcastle; S 4; D 2; Bus. Add.: 533 P.M. Street (P. O. Box 429), Pietermaritzburg — Phone:21492. uy NAIDOO, Goorappa Swaminathan: Transport Operator. b. 27th March, 1927, Pietermaritzburg. Educated: E. P. S. (Pietermaritzburg), Depot Road and Sastri College. Eldest son of Goorappa Naidoo of Sea View, Durban. Was one of younger gencration of Transport Operators in P. M. Burg. Keen supporter of various Cultural and Social organisa- tions. Activities: Past Secretary: P. M. Burg Cartage Association. Travel: Toured Rhodesias, P.E.A. and the Republic on numerous occasions. Sport: Tennis. Married: Assothie, daughter of Dhanpaul Rajah of Pietermaritzburg; S 2; Add.: Mountain Rise, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Wig NAIDOO, Harry, Williams: School Principal B.A.— (Unisa); b. 26th June, 1927, Boksburg, Transvaal. Edu.: Wm. Hills, Benoni, Eurafrican Centre, Johannesburg. Son of Moonsamy Naidoo. Origin: Madras, India. Joined teaching profession, 1947. Taught at various T.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. Activities: Ex. Pres.: E. Rand Indian Football Association; Hon. Secretary: Boksburg Tenant Association; Executive: E.T.l. & C. Cricket Union; Executive Member: Transvaal Indian Teachers Association; Ex. Councillor: Transvaal Indian Football Association; Past Secretary and Treasurer: Klerksdorp Hindu Samaj; Hon. Secretary: Western Tvl. Indian Cricket Union; Presently Committee Member: Laudium Tamil Association; Hon. Secretary: Pretoria Branch of SAITA and Comm. Member: Transvaal Cricket Federation; Founder: S. E. Transvaal C. U. (1954). Rec.: Soccer, Cricket, Tennis; Married: Minnie, daughter of Du Plessis of Potchefstroom; S 3; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13100, Laudium Phone: 79-3322. Res, Add.: 324-32nd Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. wi?) NAIDOO, Jami Latchmanasamy: Bookkeeper. b. 8th August, 1926, Durban, Natal. Educated: Stella Hill and I. C. S. Son of Latchmanasamy Naidoo. Origin: Bezwoda, Andhra State, India. Instrumental in setting up Stella Hill Area Com. 1942. Was Secretary of S.C.F.A., 1953/54; President: 1959. Served on all Sub. Comms.; Chairman — Protest and Misconduct Board. Served as Nominee: Eastern Province to S. A. Soccer Federation (1965/66/ 67). Was Secretary: S. C. C., 1953/57; Del to S. Natal; S/B — P.S.F.A.; Member: Alversville United F/C; Pres.: P/S and District Andhra Sabha; Committee Member: Educational Committee —- Jai Hind State Aided School; Secretary: Port Shepstone Hindu Educational Society; Ex. and Councillor: Port Shepstone Indian C, W. S. Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Tennis. Married: Luxmidevi, daughter THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO of T. M. Reddy formerly of Durban North; S 1;D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 16, Port Shepstone — Phone: 770; Res. 11 Gaunet Road, Port Shepstone, Natal. U20 NAIDOO, Kristappa Chengappa: Businessman. b. 20th September, 1911, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Tongaat Govt. Aided School. Son of Changappa Naidoo of Madras, Presidency, India. Operates a taxi business in Tongaat for the last thirty years. Active in various Educational, Sports, Religiour and Social Organisation; Trustee: Ton- gaat Hindu Samasara Andhra Association; Past Vice President: I. C. W. S. (Tongaat); Finance & Educational Committee; Victoria Primary School; Chairman: Ton- gaat Indian Football Association. Tongaat Amateur Swim- ming Association; Ex. Member: Natal Amateur Swimming Association; S. Natal Football Association; Chairman: Natal Indian Taxi Owners’ Association; Inanda Indian Taxi Owners Association; H/L Member: Andhra Maha Sabha (S.A.); Tongaat Hindu Samasara Andhra Association; Foundation Member and Councillor; Tongaat Recreation Union; Council Member: Tongaat Ratepayers Association. Rec.: Gardening and Music. Married: Naraimama, daughter of Yellappa Naidoo of Stamford Hill, Durban; D 2;S 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 44 — Phoneg35, Tongaat; Res. Add.: Metcalfe Street, Tongaat — Phone: 35. 24 NAIDOO, Kumari Jayalaks¢:° Indian Classical Dancer; Born: Durban, Natal. Star of ‘Dances of India”, “Valli’s Wedding”, “Bells of the Feet” and “Living Statue”. Kumari Jayalaksmi Naidoo is one of the greatest exponents of Indian Classical Dancing in this country, particularly in the Bharatam Natyam. She joined the famed Nrithyodaya Art Centre in Madras under President K. Subrah- manyam and tutor S. Padma. Her ability to adt and dance was rewarded with parts in Indian Ballet. She is now back in India studying the latest deve- lopment in the Karanas which in reality came frem the ancient/dances depicted in stone and marble which appear on temples throughout the sub-continent. She playeu an important role in “Krishna Tulabaram” as Rookmani, one of the wives of Krishna followed by others in “Kuravanji” and Meenakashi Kalyanum” which went on tour through- out India. After graduating in Bharata Natyain s:e did a course in Manipuri under Kamani Kumar Sinha, Kartak and Katha Kali. Both Indian dance masters Ramiah Pillai and Samaaj Pillai provided her with further spells of training. She was also fortunate in undergoing a period of study under, Gowriammal, reputed to.be Indian’s zreatest exponent on Padmas (expressions). Realizing the need, K. Jayalaksmi Naidoo established the S. A. Academy of Indian Classical Dancing in the sixty’s. “Dances of India” _ was the first of the Academy’s Promotions. She is the daughter of the Late Mr. and Mrs. V. R. Naidoo of Durban. F wn Pee THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN nity WHO \ NAIDOO, Kistappa Narainsamy: Businessman. b. 1916, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: E. P. S. Govt. Aided School. Son of Kistappa D. Naidoo. Origin: Pulliankan, Rani- pet, Madras, India. Entered bus. scene, 1946 — Rines Cartage. One of leading Cartage and Demolish- ling contractors in city. Widely travelled India, Ceylon, M.E. and African countries. Was one of founders of Magnus Rover Crew P. M. Burg. Was Chairman: Azalea Week Festival; Secretary: Vice President and President: Tamil Protective Association; President: Siva Soobramanian and Mariaman Temples; Chairman: Natal Eistedfodd Com. Pietermaritzburg Branch; Committee Member: T.P.A. Govt. Indian School (Educational Committee); Vice Pres.: South African Tamil Federation; Rec.: Classical Indian Music and Physical Culture. Married: Angela, daughter of R. Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; S 3; D 3. Bus. Add.: 568 Loop Street, Pietermaritzburg, Phone: 25600; Res. Add.: Berg Street, Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 25600. 2% NAIDOO, Dr. Munsamy B.: Re- tired Principal. b. 25th December, 1905, Durban, Natal. Educated: Universities of South Africa, Wit- watersrand and Harvard. Quals.: B.Sc.; U.E.D. (S.A.); B.Sc. Hons. (Rand); Litt. D. (N.J.); F.R.G.S. (London). Retired Principal of Sastri College, Durban. Other Activities: Exec. Mem.: S.A.LC. (Education and Culture). National President of Boy Scouts of South Africa (Indian Section); Chairman: Centenary Bursary Compfnittee; Trustee: Gandhi-Tagore Lecture- ship Trust; Mahatma Gandhi Phoenix Settlement, Natal. Hon. Pres.: Durban Indian Surf Life Saver’s Association. Member of M. L. Sultan Technical College Council. Patron: Naial Indian Blind Society. Chairman of the Education Council of the Mission of Eternal Religion. Has attended several International Conferégces held outside S. A. (india, U.S.A., Finland, New Zealand). Invited ‘to the U.S.A. on several occasions as Associate Professor of eography in American Institutions of Higher Learning. Awarded Kappa-Delta-Phi Medal in U.S.A. for distinguish- ed servi.es io American Education. Invited to Internation- al Geographical Congress in Montreal held in July 1972, to present 4 paper at Congress. Recipient of Grant to study conditions in the Carribean Islands and South America. Publications on Shoreline Studies in East Africa, “The East Indian” in Trinidad, etc. Organiser: Congress High School, 1949. Conferred Hon. Degree Education — CNISA, at Durban-Westville, 1973. First South African Indian ever to receive such honour. Director: New Re- publican Bank of S.A.; Hobbies: Field Geology. Married: Manickum T. K. Tandree; § 1; Res. Add.: 172 Burnwood Road, Sydenham, Durban Phone: 882783. 124 225 NAIDOO, Moonsamy Kistnasamy: Retired Principal. b. 15th April, 1893 at Sydenham, Durban, Natal. Educated: Sydenham Aided School, Sydenham Training College (First batch of Indians to be trained as teachers in Natal). Second son of Moonsamy Naidoo of Durban, Natal. One of few remaining teachers of the old school. Joined profession in 1909 at Umgeni School. Transferred to Ladysmith as Principal at the age ef twenty in 1914. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province; Served as Principal for over forty years and as teacher for over fifty eight years. Other Activities: President: First Indian Teachers Society, 1920; N.I.T.S. (1930/31); First President: S.A.I.L.T. Association (1933); General Sec: 1929/30; L.V.P.: N.LT.S. (1933); Foundation Member: Moonlights T/C; Councillor and Vice President: D.D.LF.A. Founder: Pinetown I. C. W. Society; First Secretary: Motala Lads -Hostel; Was a Councillor: Durban Indian Sports Association; Rep. Transvaal as Exec. Member: National Soccer Board =~ All Indian Tour; Councillor and Vice (Chairman: South African Lawn Tennis Association. Officiated as refree — opening match — All India Tourat Durban. Sports: Soccer, Cricket and Tennis: Played rep. Soccer, Senior and Junior Division. Captain: Natal (1930); Vice Captain: Natal at Sam China Tourney at Port Eliza- beth and Kimberley 1933. Toured South Africa in 1926 with Natal XI. Member: Sydenham F/C; Cricket: Schools C/C. Rep. Durban at Cricket; Member: N.LT.S. XI (1950) on Tour. Keen Tennis Player — Moonlights T/C. Bus. Add.: 23 Stansfield Lane, Pinetown — Phone: 76879; Res. Add.: 23 Stansfield Lane, Pinetown — Phone: 76879. 27 NAIDOO, Moonsamy Kisten: Businessman. b. 12th July, 1935, Kingwilliams Town, Cape Province. Eldest son of Chinnapen K. Naidoo. Origin: Madras, India. First entered family business, 1961. Was previously in the Shoe Indus- try — Kaffrarian Boot Mnfrs., 1949/61. Director: C. K. Naidoo; Naidoo Bros. and Ray’s Cartage and Brickworks, Kingwilliams Town. Is also in the Cafe & Fruit & Fresh Produce business. Activities: Was Chairman: Raj F/C; Member: Kingwilliams Town Indian Association; Rec.: Rugby and Cricket. Married: Tholsiama, daughter of V.M. Naidoo of Cavendish, Natal; S 1; D 2. Bus. Add.: 82 Cambridge Road, Kingwilliams Town Phone 3212. 2G NAIDOO, Narainsamy Moonsamy: Tailor and Outfitter. b. 14th June, 1916, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Ladysmith Govt. Indian School. Son of Late Mr. & Mrs. Moonsamy Naidoo of Ladysmith, Natal. Est. own Tailoring & Outfitting bus. in P. M. Burg in 1939. Very keen follower of local sports. Was League Tennis Player and played Soccer and Cricket. Patron: Young Natalians Cricket and Soccer Clubs. Travel: Toured India (1956), Europe in 1964, Holland . Great Britain, Germany, Belgium, France, ‘Austria, Switzerland, Italy and Middle East Countries. Rec.: Travel. Married: Sarasvathic Velloo Path- a “er of Durban; $7; D 2. Bus. Add.: 155 Retief Street, P. M. Burg ~— Phone: 21047; Res. Add.: 1952 RetiefStreet, P.M. ~Burg Phone: 21047.

---

## Page 16

226 ae yaa NAIDOO, Narainsamy Pakari: Businessman. b. 8th April, 1916, Durban, Natal. Educated: Mitchell Crescent, Depot Road. Son of Narainsamy Naidoo. Origin: Madras, India. Activities: Bookkeeper since 1934. Joined firm of Vawdas, Newcastle, 1936/40. Was with Premier Production, Dur- ban, 1941/55. Returned to Newcastle and rejoined Vaw- das; is at present with the firm as Credit Manager and Accountant for over fifteen years. Established business of Nu-Way Trading Store in 1968 (managed by brothers). Was Hon. Auditor: Greenwood Park Thrift Club; Hon. Treasurer: Greenwood Park School and Temple Comm.; Hon. Auditor: St. Oswalds High School; Hon. Auditory: S. E. Vawdas Govt. Aided School; Hon. Treasurer: New- castle Tamil Association; President: Eaglets Sporting Union; Vice President: N/C United F.C.; Committee Member: N/C Indian C. W. S. Rec.: Was Captain — Park- hill C. C. (Durban); Captain — Sutherlands C. C. (Mayville). Keen on Angling. Married: Yogambal, daughter of T. Naicker; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 6, Newcastle; S 3; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 6, Newcastle, Phone: 44. Res. Add.: $4 Jenkyn Street, Paradise, Newcastle; Phone: 27. U2s NAIDOO, Narainsamy Ramsamy: Public Bookkeeper. Diploma I/B/A (S/A); b. 5th March, 1906, Camperdown, Natal. Educated: Higher Grade, Durban, Depot Rd.; Son of Late Narainsamy Naidoo. Origin: Madras, India. Entered Bookkeeping field forty four years ago. Establidhed Agency 1950, as Naidoo’s Agency; Ins. Agents, Land & Estate & Loans. Voluntary Vernacular Teacher. Active Worker of the Tamil Association, Newcastle; Trustee: Newcastle Tamil Association; Hindu Mariama Temple; Member: Newcastle Indian Rate- payers Association; Acting Priest: Mariamma Temple; Hon. Auditor: I.C.W.S. — Newcastle Branch; Rec.: Religious studies. Sports: Angling. Married: Anjelay, daughter of M. J. Naidoo of Durban; S 4; D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 194, Newcastle, Natal — Phone: 593; Res. Add.: 40 Jenkyn Street, Newcastle, Natal. eo 29 NAIDOO, Patmanathan “Crash” R.: School Teacher; b. 12th March, 1933, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: St. Pauls, Woodlands — Springfield and UNISA — (B.A.); Fourth son of V. R. Naidoo of P. M. Burg. Began teaching in 1956 at Howick Govt. Aided School. Transferred St. Pauls, 1958/60; P. M. Burg Gujarati Ve- dic 1961/64; Raisethorp High School, 1965. Sports: Cricket: School XI — Woodlands High School, Senior League — Royals . C/C (1952/69); R/H Opening Bat: -. Rep. P. M. Burg — 1953/65. North Coast Union, 1955}. Inter-race: v/s Coloureds, 1959. Captain: P. M. Burg “B” ’. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 1962. Soccer: Rep. P. M. Burg — Juveniles 1952. Senior League: Stella Football Club. Other Activities: Secretary: P.M. Burg Amateur Swimming Association (1967); Mem.: New Holmes Ratepayers Association; Council Member: Woodlands O/B Club — Org. Art Sect.; Org.: S.A.LT.A. (Sports) P. M. Burg; Member: S.A.I.T.A.; Sportsmaster: Raisethorp High School, P. M. Burg; Secretary /Treasurer: Royals C/C. Rec.: Gardening; Married: Morganayagee, youngest daughter of M. Govender of P. M. Burg; S 2. Bus, Add.: Raisethorp High School; Res. Add.: 101 De- ccan Road, New Holmes. [bo NAIDOO, Ramachandra Appana: Director of Companies. b. Ist February, 1923, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: Wesleyan Indian School Pietermaritzburg and Higher Grade Durban. Son of Late Appana Naidoo of P. M. Burg. Sales ea of ae Ltd., Verulam, an irector of A. gencies (Pty.) Ltd., Durban, ees of Pakco (Pty.) Ltd. Originally a stall holder in the Durban Indian Markefe Began as agent, A. R. Agencies, in 1947. Was sole rep. of Pakco (Pty.) Ltd. for Natal. Also handled Insurance. Became a Director of Pakco in 1956. Public spirited. Activities: President: Durban Indian Stall Holders Association; Chairman: Hindu Service Brigade; Hearts Football Club; Council Member: Tongaat Indian Ratepayers Association. Keen Sportsman. Plays Golf; Rec.: Angling, Music and Travel. Married: Sornum, d/o Late V. Puckree Thaver of Greyville, Durban; S 1; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 65, Verulam — Phone: 118/183/ 308, Verulam; Res. Add.: La Mercy, Tongaat Phone: 1803 — Tongaat, Natal. 113] NAIDOO, Ramaya Gengadu: Mer- chant Tailor. b. 23rd June, 1912, Sea Cow Lake, Durban, Natal. Educated: Umgeni Govt. Indian School and Higher Grade. Son of Gengadu Naidoo of Sea Cow Lake and Andhra State, India. Began Tailoring business in Durban as Popular Tailors in 1931. Moved to Pinetown 1958. Estab. business Fashion House Tailors — Leading Tailors in Pinetown. Takes keen interest in local “activities. Is a member of the Master Tailors Association; Rec.: Travel and Music. Bus. Add.: 23 Moodie Street, Pinetown — Phone: £76959; Res. Add.: 23 Moodie Street, Pinetown-— Phone: 276959. oa Pi i a a Te ee Me THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO WSs NAIDOO, Ramsamy Krishna- samy: Land & Estate Agent. b. 24th June, 1906, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: Methodist Sch. and York Rd. Son of Late J. R. Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg and Viziagapatam. Previously master confectioner over forty years Diploma Cake Decorating. Est. Land & Estate Business, 1953 Kitty Boyds L/Agency. Leading Sports Administrator and Sports- man. Activities: Past Vice Pres.: M.D.F.A.; Chairman: Y. Natalians F/C (26 years), Manager and Selector — Club and Dist. Level. Played Soccer for Aryans F/C and Stella F/C; Trustee: Raisethorp Rec. Club, Raiscthorp Sanathan Sabha; Trustee and L/V/P.: Raisethorp Tamil Educational Society; Member and Pres.: F.O.S.A.; Raisethorp Rep.: I-C.W.S., Member/Founder and Secretary: Raisethorp Ratepayers Association. Also Auditor: Raisethorp Ratepayers Association; L/V/P.: Deewali Cheer Com.; Auditor: Baijoo Maharaj School; Member: Aryan Benevolent Society (P. M. Burg); Sub- ramanian and Mariaman Temple; Past Joint Secretary: Col. Born and Settlers Association; Vice President: Pietermaritzburg Indian Congress; Rec.: Literature and Angling. “Married: Maria, daughter of Late Mr. & Mrs. A. Beukes of Pretoria; S 4; D 1. Bus. Add.: 523 Church St., Pietermaritzburg — Phone: 22114; Res. Add.: 9 A/S Buildings, Mysore Road, Raisethorp Phone: 20674. | RAMSWAMI, Moonswami Nai- doo: FBAA; FCBI; FICOM; (Lon- don). Commissioner of Oaths — Born: 1900, Tongaat, Natal. Eld- est son of Mr. P. Ramswami Nai- doo, formerly of Newcastle. Married: Dhanalutchmec, eldest daughter of Mr. & Mrs. R. K. Naidoo, formerly of Durban North, Durban. Edu.: Convent School, Newcastle, Fairbreeze Indian School, Stamford Hill Commercial College and Private Study. Gained Commercial Teach- ers Diploma in Commerce and Accountancy and was Principal of School of Bookkeeping and Accountancy — Fellow of the British Association of Accountants and Additors (London). Business commenced in 1928 as Company Secretary, Business Consultant, Estates Administrator, Real Estate and Financial Agent. Director of Companies. Organised and Founded “Liberty Puiiding Society” in 1947 (registered under Building Societies Act) its ‘Secretary and Manager for eighteen vears thereafter merged with Provincial Building Society of South Africa now its Manager for “Liberty Branch”. Public Activities: Hon. Treasurer and Trustee: Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Trust; Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust; Trustce Mahatma Gandhi Phoenix Settlement Trust; rustee — Natal Indian Blind and Deaf Society; Ex. Gran- tee: Alencon Govt. Aided Indian School; Ex. Council Member of the M. L. Sultan Technical College. Associated with several Social, Religious and Educational Institutions. Bus. Add.: 71 Albert Street, Dufban Phone: 22856; . Res. Add.: 8, Hibiscus Place, Asherville, Durban Phone: 888319. 227 uBt NAIDOO, Sooba Rama Barthasa- P.M. Burg. Educated: WoodJands, (High School); Son of S. R. Nai- doo. Origin: Polur, Madras, India. Director of Companies. Joined family business — S. R. Naidoo & Agents in the Capital. Other Acts.: Patron: Allandale Ratepayers Association; Chairman: Aryan ‘ Benevolent Society (Bldg. Comm. fe) Rec. Block). Was Secretary: Natal Comm.; Festival of the Soil (P. M. Burg and Midlands). First Association Member: P. M. Burg Chamber of Commerce; Chairman: Board of Management Sunlit Gardens 1970. Appointed Member: South African Indian Council, 1968/71; Chairman: P. M. Burg Society; Patron: Deepavali Cheer Society; Member: M. L. Sultan Technical College Council. Connected with various other Sporting, Social, Religious and Cultural bodies in the city. Interests: Cine Photography and Lt. Classical Music. Widely travelled. Married: Leele S. N. Naidoo; S 1; 22257/42147; Res. Add.: Dunveria, P. M. Burg, Natal. 125° NAIDOO, Tharley Juggiah: Busi- nessman. b. 1896, Bobbili, Madras, India. Arrived in South Africa in Natal, North Coast. Became a part- ner in the firm of A. P. Naidoo & Co., Tinley Manor in 1921. Later assumed control of the firm and also established a branch at (Pty.) Ltd. Public spirited, he was a Trustee of the South African Andhra Maha Sabha (Durban Branch), and Patron of the Shree Soobramonian Temple of Tinley of the School Committee; Res. Add.: Tinly Manor, Natal. 3G NAIDOO, Varatharajalu Gopalsamy: Businessman; b. 13th August, 1915, Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Miss Fergu- son School, Pretoria. Son of Late Venugopal Naidoo. men of the 30’s. Played for Transvaal Sam China — Johannesburg, 1935. Cricket: N. Transvaal; Tennis: Natal Table Tennis Association; Clubs: Pretorians F/C; Preto- rians C/C; Pretoria Old Boys T/C; Rugby: Black Dominoes and Rangers. Keen Physical Culturist. Played for Transvaal Association; Pretoria and District I.F.A.; Pretoria I. C. Union; Chairman: Pretoria Refrees Association; Treasurer: Pre. Tamil League; Organiser Pre. Yoga Sinth Bhajan; Ran Physical Culture Society (1931/40); Travel: P.E.A. Sports: Rugby, Soccer, Cricket, Tennis and Physical rathee: b. Sth September, 1929, ~ —— Sons — 1965. Leading Estate Midlands Republican Festival Indian Local Affairs Comm.; Secretary: Aryan Benevolent D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 8001, P. M: Burg Phone: 1910 and settled at Tinley Manor, Stanger as A. P. Naidoo & Co. Manor. Closely connected with local education as Member Origin: Mauritius. Public spirited. One of leading Sports- Inter-race Soccer 1935/39. Vice President: Pretoria L/T Culture. Married: Irene Gopalsamy, daughter of Mr. & the “+ Late Frederick Peters. S 4; D 2. Bus. Add.: 399 -- 7th St., ‘Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria Phone: 27797; Res. Add.: 399 “. 7th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria Phone: 29797.

---

## Page 17

228 | The R. M. Naidoo Family of Pinetown "3 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Soon after his arrival in South Africa during the third quarter of the century. Ramsamy Naidoo settled in Mt. Edgecombe and after the first five years, moved to Pine- town, where he began farming on leased land at Roos- fontein and Wyebank. Little is known of the family’s early sttuggles but the birth of “R.M.”’ in 1903, heralded a change in family fortunes. In 1920 the two brothers, Moonsamy and Subbiah, took their first steps into the Fruit and Vegetable business as Naidoo Bros. & Sons. It was not long before: the hard work and business acumen began to show results. The fruit and vegetable business became a stopping place for visitors from all over the Republic and beyond. Subbiah died in 1949 and it was left to “R.M.”’ to continue the development which both brothers had begun as partners. He was a public-spirited man. He organised the Marianhili Flood Disaster Fund in 1939. In 1949, he was in the forefront again during the Riots, organising Relief for the thousands of homeless, often at great personal risk. During the 1939/45 world conflict, he was a member of the government appointed Pinetown and District Firearms Application Panelas well as the Tyre and Petrol Rationing Committee. was supervisor of the Motala Lads Hostel. Chairman @f the Wyebank Hindu Temple, the Wyebank Indian Rate- payers Association, the Wyeb fdian School Board, he held various posts in numerOUs Organisations covering Indian sports, culture and educatiopaHe set up Pinetown’s first Steam Laundery in 1938 as et own Dry-Cleaners. Earlier, both brothers had broken into Transport business. Horatio Transport still runs under its original name. He also held interests in Pinetown’s first Indian cinema. Born in Mt. Edgecombe in 1901, he died on the Ist January, 1962 at the age of sixty two. NAIDOO, Moonsamy Adiseh: N.T.D. b. 20th July, 1929, Pine- town, Natal. Educated: Pinetown Indian School. Sastri College. Son of Moonsamy R. M. Naidoo. Ori- gin: Vellore. Sastri College (Victor Ludorum) — 1945 and 1947. College Champion 1945 and 1947, 100 yards, 220 and 440. Member of winning Team Suncrush Shield 1947 (Pinetown F.C.). Played in South African Soccer Trials (1949) to tour India. Activities: Chairman: Wyebank Ratepayers Association; Member: Saivete Sethanga Sangon, Pinetown ; Member: School Fund Committee and Present Chairman of the Pinetown State Aided School. Rec.: Soccer, Tennis, Athletics, Angling. Married: Jugathambal, daughter of Marslamoney Govender; S 1; D 3; Bus. Add.: 50 Old Main Road, Pinetown — Phone: 76536; Res. Add.: 20 Benghazi Crescent, Reservoir Hills. | NB NAIDOO, Jugathambal A. M.: Businesswoman. b. Pinetown, Ntl. Wife of M. A. Naidoo. Educated: Pinetown and Durban Girls High. Eldest daughter of Late M. Goven- der of Pinetown. Joined husband’s business, 1953 -— Pinetown Super Market. Interests: Literature and Gardening. Keen Tennis Player. Member: Pinetown Tennis Club. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO uB NAIDOO, Venkatsamy Ae Sales Agent. b. 21st March, 1935, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Edu.: Methodist School, Woodlands. Son of A. V. Naidoo; Origin: Thirive- lapur, South India. Associated with scouting for last 28 years. Joinly represented for High Schools — Drum- Majorettes and Cadet Corps in co-op. with Indian Affairs Department. Previously Leather Worker (eighteen years) — Shop Steward to Committee Member (1950/68); Com- poser: Bugle Band. Was Manager of various Soccer Clubs; Member: Red Cross (A/D27) P. M. Burg, New Holmes Ratepayers Association; Drum Major: Magnus Rover Crew (P. M. Burg) Bugle Band; Del. to Leather Workers’ Conf. — Cape Town and Port Elizabeth — South African Leather Workers Union — (P. M. Burg); Rec.: Angling, Scouts, Music. Married: Rookmoney, daughter of Freddy Naidoo of Pietermaritzburg; S 3; D 1. Bus. Add. 46°cb Church Street, Pietermaritzburg; Res. Add.: 5 Innes Ave., New Holmes. yo NAIDOO, Viraragavelu Rajoo: Principal. B.A. (Hons.), South Africa; M.A. (Natal); N.T.D.; b. 13th October, 1919, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Tongaat Indian Boys & Sastri College. Son of A. R. Naidoo. Origin: Viziagapatam, India. Joined teaching profession in 1936 Tongaat Indian Boys. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the province. Was President, Secretary, Treasurer and Captain: Tongaat Indian Tennis Club; Founder: F.O.S.A. (Care Com.) Tongaat; President: Hindu Youth Club (Tongaat); Treasurer: Mayville and Dist. Indian Schools Sports Association; Chairman and Founder: Isipingo Beach Country Club; Executive Member: Indian Beach Civic Association; Served on Beach Amenities, Library Committee (1/B); Founder and Chairman: I/B Hindi Soc.; Founder: I/B Arutpa Khazagam; I/B Tamil School; Sports: Tennis, Chess; Married: Sungaree, daughter of R. G. Nai- doo of Greyville, Durban; S 2; D 2. Bus. Add.: Truro State Aided School (2), Chatsworth — Phone: 849420; Res. Add.: 76 Saunders Avenue, Isipingo Hills. Lt 44 NAIDU, Jogiah Ganga: School Principal. b. 4th April, 1916, Mitchell Park, Durban, Natal. Educated: Depot Road School, Durban, B.A., Natal University of Natal, Principal of High School. Third son of Jogiah Naidu of Durban. Joined teaching profes- sion 1937 as Supernumerary: Full- time teacher 1939 Naidoo Memorial — Umkomaas. Taught at various schools (N.E.D.) through- out the Province. Principal: May- ville State Aided Indian High Sch- . ool. Chairman: S.A.LT.S.; Vice Chairman: Rosebank Sporting and Athletic Club. Played League Tennis forCentrals, Durban. Rep. Athletic Club; 229 Member: I. C. W. S. — Umkomaas; F.0O.S.A. — Umko- maas. Married: Eldest daughter of N. P. Naidoo of Port Shepstone; S 1. Bus. Add.: Mayville State Aided High School, Durban; Res. Add.: 28 Mt. Batten Drive, Reservoir Hills, Durban. Ne2 NAIDU, Kotappa B.: Farmer; b. October, 1917, Welbed- acht, Durban, Natal. Educated: Welbedacht Indian School. Son of Bodi Naidu of Amravedi, Andhra State, India and Welbedacht. Long established farmer in Welbedacht area since 1930. Moved to Braemar in 1962 and thence to Umzinto 1965. Market Produce Farmer and Banana Cultivation. Won award — Soil Festival First Prize Market Produce, 1968. Rec.: Gardening, and all sports. Married: Angela, daughter of Rangasamy Pillay of Clare 'Estate, Durban. S 3; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 89 — Phone: 186; Res. Add.: Main Road, Umzinto, Natal. ue NAIDU, Manie N.: Businessman. b. 15th June, 1909, Isipingo, Natal. Educated: Isipingo and St. Aidans - Durban. Son of Narsimulu Naidu of Isipingo and Ramiah Naidu of Vigiaputmum, Andhra State, India. Activities: Merchant Tailor — Monarch Tailors and Outfitters. Origin: Durban where he traded as Art Tailors in Madressa Arcade from 1927. American and Italian Diplomas for Designing and Cutting. Was a keen student of Religion and supporter of all deserving causes. Was Foundation Member: Divine Life Society; President: Andhra Sabha, Pietermaritz- burg. Foundation Member and Past Captain: Silverton F.C. (Stella) of Durban; Founder: Monarch Wanderers, P. M. Burg; Ex. Boxing Manager; Rec.: Music, Art and Travel. Married: Govindamah, daughter of Late K. G. Naidoo; S 2; D 3. Died: October, 1972. Family Res. Add.: $ Kains Flats, 521 Church Street, P. M. Burg. liy¢ b NAIDU, Raj: Businessman. b. 13th September, 1931, Maidstone, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Krishnasamy Naidoo and grandson of Sunasse Naidoo of Andhra State, India. Trading in the Sand- fields area of Maidstone under the name of Noodsburg Supply Store. Established in 1945. Takes keen interest in all local activities; Chairman: Sandfields Parent/ Teachers Association; Treasurer: Tongaat Ratepayers Association; Member: Divine Life Society; Rec.: Travel, Literature. Married: Balanagambal Naidoo, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. C. P. Naidoo of Maitland Park, Tongaat; S 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 33, Maidstone, Phone: _ 121, Tongaat; Res. Add.: Sandfields, Maidstone, Natal — . Phone: 121.

---

## Page 18

Munsami Naidu, the pioneering member of the family, arrived in this country towards the latter part of the century. He was of the very few who could be considered as lettered and after the usual period of indentures, joined the prison service where he served for thirty five years. During the period with His Majesty’s Prisons he also kept books for various firms to supplement his income and he also acted as a scribe for those not fortunate enough to be able to write their own letters to the home country in Tamil and English. He married Lutchmee Naidu, daughter of Govindsamy Naidu, who was attached to the Verulam Immigration Trust Hospital on Katzkop Hill as a compounder. Of the ten children, Nadamuni was born on the 20th January, 1903. Educated at Wesleyan School and Higher Grade he joined the Civil Service in 1938. He was appointed Indian Interpreter Clerk at the Immigration Office, Point, and the same year transferred M4S The M. N. Naidu Family of Verulam THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ive to Pinetown where he served for five years. He was trans- ferred to Newcastle in 1943 where, besides court activities, he was Chairman of the I. C. W. Society and the Hindu Mariaman Temple. He was also ex officio C/O for the District. He also served as Clerk of Court. His final trans- fer to Verulam in 1950 has meant an unbroken seventeen years in the town which includes the position of Assistant District Registrar of Births and Deaths (1962). This is the first such position ever held by an Indian in this country. He is very much active in local Indian Affairs. He‘is a Committee Member of the Indian Child Welfares$ociety, a Trustee of Verulam Siva Subramaniar Témple and in the construction of the Temple Hall, he was a prime mover towards the project. Married; Seethamah Gangappa Naidoo; S 4; D 1. Res. Addy: 12 Court Lane, Verulam — Phone: 139. és ne? NAIDU, Ramsamy Duraisamy: Trade Unionist. b. 24th Sept., 1915, Durban, Natal. Educated: St. Aidan’s Boys School. Son of Duraisamy Naidoo. Origin: Coim- baitore, South India. Joined Trade Union Activities, 1931. Was in the Baking Industry and was Founder and Secretary of the Union until 1948. Founder: — Engineering Union (1944/71). Founder and Secretary: India League; Origin and Secretary: Sweetworkers’ Union. Travel: India, Pakistan, E.A., and P.E.A. Was awarded Natal and South Africa colours — Natal and South Africa Weightlifting, 1971 for services rendered to this branch of Sport. Courted imprisonment, Passive Resistance and Emergency. Activities: H.L.V.P.: Natal Weightlifting and P.C. Association (1941/71); H.L.V.P. and National Sec.: South African Amateur Weightlifting and Body Building Federation (1938/71); H.L.V.P.: St. Aidans Club; Former Member: N.LC.; One of five Founder Members: F.O:S.A.; Chairman: L.C.W.S. (Sydenham — Asherville, Springfield Housing); Founder: Overport Social Club; Del.: Various Sporting and Inquiry bodies; Past Secretary: S. A. R. & H. Emp. Trade Union; Rec.: All Sports; Married: Min, daughter of Late Mr. and Mrs. Marie of Durban; S4;D 4. Res. Add.: 73 Mullian Place, Asherville, Durban. a Ute NAIDU, V. M.: Librarian, b. 7th July, 1888, India. Edtreated: Fair- breeze Indian School. Arrived in South Africa in 1899. Was associated with uncle, R. Naidoo, Tongaat from 1907. Commenced duties as Librarian -— Gandhi Library — 1926. Retired 1958. Foundation Mem. and Secre- tary, 1912 ~ Tongaat Hindu Samrasa Bodha Asso.; In 1915 he founded the Tongaat Andhra Dharma Patashala. Foundation Member: Andhra Maha Sabha of South Africa in 1931 and First President of the Sabha from 1931 to 1941. Presently Hon. L. V. P. and Trustee of the A. M. S. S. A. Married: Bungaramma; S 2; D 6. Add.: 34-25th Avenue, Umhlatuzana Township, Durban. age < eam _ * THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 231 NOES IIE I HEH HEHE HEH, HOE IH HOE HOE HL HEH BE HK HOEHIE HK BOE HH HEH HEHE HEH HOEHK EH HOE HL HEH BOEHL BME I HR HB HB HE I HB BS J HE TRIE IE EEK HEHE FEE HEE The P. Naidu Family of Ixopo HOEY EEE IE IE I HL HE HEH BH II IE HE HE NE HEHE BH I HOEHOEHOEHEEHL BB HEHEHE HH BH HE HE HOEHEHE HEB BIB HEH HE Hk 3 3 HE HH HB BE HE x 3 x % 3 xX x x Ed Ed % F NAIDU, Pushpanathan: Principal. b. 26th November, 1938, Malvern, Natal. Educated: Sastri College, Spring- field Training College. Son of Gopaul Naidu. Career: WY | Teaching 1960 Shallcross School. Transferred Arya Samaj, Springfield (1963), Sezela (1966), Ixopo (1967); Principal (1968). Treasurer: Association; Chairman: Ixopo Combined Sports Luckystrike Football Club; Sports: Soccer, Cricket; Rec.: Music. Travel: P.E.A.; Married: Sunthervalli, daughter of Jack Govender; S 1. Bus. Add.: c/o Ixopo Indian School, P. O. Ixopo. NAIDU, Suntheravalli: Housewife; b. Merebank, Durban. Educated: Merebank, Natal. Teaching Staff — Ixopo Indian School. Activities: Chairman: Ixopo Indian Wo- mens Club; Sports: Netball, Physical Training, Music and ah ‘Abe Travel. The “Nichhabhai Nanabhai Family Fa, of ' Pretoria The first of the family to arrive here was Nichhabhai who settled here in 1902. After several years in Johannesburg he moved to Volksrust were he dealt in Fruit and Vege- tables. After numerous trips to India he finally settled in Pretoria where he established his first business in Prinsloo Street as Furniture Manufacturer. He died in India in 1953 after a long stay of some fourteen years in the homeland. {go NICHHABHAI, Khandoobhai: Businessman; b. 11th February, 1926 at Pethan, District Surat, India. Educated: Navsari, Pretoria School. Son of Nichhabhai Nanabhai. Origin: Pethan, Navsari, District Surat, India. Established York City Tailors & Outfitters. Activities: Patron: Delfos Football Club; Past Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Member: Transvaal Prajapathi Association; Rec.: Soccer. Travel: India. Married: Nandiben, daughter of Parbhoo Dajee of Jalapore, Navsari, India; S 1; D 1. Bus. Add.: 375 Boom Street, Pretoria Phone: 24643; Res. Add.: 377 Cowie Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria — Phn.: 24643. ngot NANDIBEN, Khandoobhai, Nichhabhai: Housewife; b. Mooifontein District, Standerton, Transvaal. Daughter of Parbhoo Dajee; Interests: Needlework and Sewing.

---

## Page 19

u$2 NAIR, Kenneth Reuben: School Principal. b. 25th April, 1909, Durban. Educated: St. Aidan’s Prov. Technical College and Natal University College. Son of Raman Nair of Cochin, Malabar, India. Joined. teaching profession in fontein, 1928. Taught at various schools under N.E.D.; Member: Natal Indian Teachers Society, 1925 to 1967. Was Treasurer, Boy’s Scouts Association (1947/53). Assistant Div. Com- missioner, 1950/53. Connected with F.O.S.A.; Past Pres.: Natal Indian Schools Football Association; 1938/41; Executive Member: David Landau Community Centre. President: Social Services South Africa. Patron: St. Aidan’s Old Boys Club. After a transfer to Wentworth Primary in 1968, now Principal at Chatsworth 51 — State Primary since 1971. Married: Saraswati B. Maharaj; S 2; ae 1923, St. Thomas, Westville. Pro- moted to Principalship, Roos- 4 a Executive Member, Vice President and Past President: Natal Indian Initiated Women’s Circle, David Landau, 1956. First Chairman: Asherville Ratepayers’ Association, 1955. Vice D 2. Add.: P. O. Box 23, Wentworth, Durban; Res. Add.: 317 Silverglen Cresceat, Silverglen, Durban. "$3 NANKAN, Rajaram: Businessman. b. 8th May, 1923, Umzinto, Natal. Educated: Farm Rock Govt. Aided School — Sastri College. Third son of Nankan Chautree. Went into retail trade immediately after leaving school. Was also in transport business between 1947 to 1949 (Suburban Bus Service). Opened New India Trading Store, 1953, Thornwood Trading Store ~ Marine Hill. Established business Donnybrook — 1946 (N. Rajaram); Rec.: Literature and Travel. Toured Republic numerous. occasions. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 46, Richmond, Natal — Phone: 186; Res. Add.: Church Street, Richmond, Natal. us NARKER, Mohamed Hoosen: Businessman. b. 30th Aug., 1926, Bombay, India. Educated: Kolaba, India. Son of Hoosen Haroon Narkar. Origin: Kolaba District, Bombay, India. First entered business scene 1941—Kismet Stores. Is one of leading businessmen in the Cape. Director of Companies, Widely travelled. Is an.active Member of the local Madressa, Social and Cultural Organisations. Takes a keen interest in home (Kolaba) activities. Married: Khatija, daughter of Osman Essop; S 2; D 5. Bus. Add.: 24a Waterkant Street, Cape Town — Phone: 534047; Res. Add.: Bontehuwal Avenue, Cape Town Phone: 29274. ns NARAIN, Lekha: Farmer and Businessman. b. 14th Nov., 1918, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Isinenbe Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Narain of Tongaat and Agra, N. India. Market Produce and Cane Farmer in the Doorn- kloof area, near Tongaat. Activities: Trustee: Shree Vish- nu Temple — Doornkloof; Trustee and Secretary: Doorn- THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO kloof Govt. Aided Indian School; Member: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Parent/Teachers Association; Doornkloof School Fund Committee. Interested in wel- fare of community and has contributed largely to charit- able and educational needs of district. Sports: Soccer and Cricket; Rec.: Literature and Music. Married: Bhagwanthie Sewak of Isinenbe; S 4; D 6. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 1 — Phone: 1511 — Tongaat. Res. Add.: Doormkloof, Lower Tugela District. IbG NARAYADU, Ambrose, Gabriel: Retired School Principal. b. 31st May, 1905, Pentrich, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: Sutherlands Govt., University of Natal (Ext.); B.A.-Son of N. Narayadu. Origin; Vellore, Andhra State, India. Joined teaching profession in 1917 as Asssitant Teacher — Sutherlands School, P. M. Burg. Taught at various N.E.D. Schools throughout the Province. Acts.: Was well-known Sports Admini- strator in Weenen County (1926/ 35). Keen Social Worker. Has been connected with F.O.S.A. since inception ~ P. M. Burg (Northdale); Record Clerk. Present Vice Chairman: Northdale Ratepayers Association; Committee Member: Gandhi Centenary Memorial.Committee (P. M. Burg). Other Activities: Local Affairs; Sports: Tennis (Centrals); Horticulture; Married: Lydia, daughter of Paul Zacharia of P. M. Burg; S 3; D 4; Res. Add.: Dawn Villa, 31 Chetty Road, Northdale, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. is) NAROTHUM, Munchoo: Businessman. b. 22nd August, 1922, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: M. K. Gandhi Govt. Aided School Durban. One of Estcourt’s early Indian Boot & Shoe repair business. Est. business — M. Narotham - 1944. Nominated to first Indian Local Affairs Committee 1966. Re-appointed for present term. Also Member of various organisations in the District. Married; Keen Tennisite; Bus. Add.: 81 Harding Street and 140 Albert Street, Phone: 229, Estcourt, Natal. h 3 NARSHI, Changanlal Vassan: Businessman. b. 25th Aug., 1935, Cape Town. Educated: Battswood Training College. Son of Vassan Narshi. Origin: Gandevia, District Surat, India. Entered retail business in 1961. Now owns a second retail business, stocking exclusive Gents Wear. The leading Man’s Shop in South Africa, Naval base of Simonstown. Enjoys an exclusive European clientele. Is also in the Motor Trade. Buyer and Seller of new and used cars. Married: Paravati, daughter of Manilal Parsotam; $ 1;D 1. Activities: Founder Member: Universal Table Tennis Ciub. First Indian to join Simonstown Recreation Club (Col.). Enthusiastic Member of Mochi Mandal. Rec.: Badminton and Table Tennis. Bus. Add.: St. Georges Street, Simons- town Phone: 866145; Res. Add.: Alfred Street, Simons- town, Cape Province - Phone: 866145. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The . Bob Narrandas Family of Gleneoe iy 2 ism NARRANDAS, Hera Bob: Principal. b. 20th April, 1914, Glencoe, Natal. Educated: Glencoe Bantu, Glencoe and Indian Private School, Dundee Govt. School. Son of Julum Singh Bob Narrandas. Joined teaching profession, 1936 — Glencoe Govt. Aided School. Promoted Principal — Putni- spruit Govt. Aided School, 1942. Transferred Pomeroy Govt. Aided School, 1945; Putnispruit, 1955. Transferred on promotion — A. J. Kajee State Aided School Mooi River, 1968. Outstanding Soccerite Rep. N. Natal F.A. All India Touring Team (1934). Rep. N. Natal at all levels, including all India Triangular Tournaments. Activities: Was Secretary, President and Treasurer of various N. Natal Sports bodies. Member of Red Cross Detachment 1939/45, at Glencoe; Committee Member: Ramakrishna Centre, Glencoe; Member: M. R. Ratepayers Association; Voluntary Social Worker. Rec.: Soccer — Pirates F.C. (Dundee), G.I.F.C., Ladysmith Schools and. Stars F.C.; Cricket: Glendan C.C.; Angling, Motor Cycling. Married: Padmavathic, daughter of 1. R. Singh of Red Hill, Durban; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 79, Mooi River, Phone: 122. Res. Add.: Market Street, Mooi River Phone: 122. 233 The first of this branch of the Narrandas Family, Baboo Narrandas Singh, arrived in this country in the seventy’s. He settled in Pietermaritzburg and joined the Borough Police, rising to the rank of a Police Sergeant. The youngest son of Baboo Narrandas Singh was Julum Singh, better known as Bob Narrandas. He was born on the 6th of January, 1886, Pietermaritzburg, and was educated at the Higher Grade Schools in Pietermaritzburg and Durban. After some time with a brick manufacturing concern, he joined the Borough Police. In 1906, he resigned from the force and joined the South Africa Collieries at Glencoe as an Assistant Storeman. He later served the Northfield collieries in the same capacity until 1947 when he retired. He was one of the outstanding sportsmen of the period having excelled at soccer, cricket, cycling and boxing. He represented Natal at cricket in 1903 against the Transvaal and also represented Northern Natal, P. M. Burg District and Klip River at soccer and cricket. Together with his brother, Dowluth (Dick) he was a pioneer in the boxing field amongst non-Whites in this country. The Jack Mood- ley and Bob Narrandas fight in 1906 was a classic and is still discussed amongst old timers. He took a keen interest in all Indian activities and was a pioneer member of the Glencoe Indian School Society. He was also a Member of the Ramakrishna Centre at Glencoe. His death on the 8th of July, 1962 at the age of seventy six meant the loss to the Indian Community of a colourful personality who had done much to encourage sports in this province. UGo PADMAWATHIE: Wife of Narrandas Hera Bob; House- wife; b. Avoca. Eldest daughterof I. R. Singh of Red Hill, Durban. Interests: Embroidery and Sewing and Social Welfare $4;D 2. 16) ROOPLEKAH: b. 3rd September, 1960, Ladysmith Dist. (Putinspruit). Student Std. II] — A. I. Kajee School. Interests: Music, Reading and Sports.

---

## Page 20

234 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HEIL HE HE NOEMOE NOE BH HHL HE NOE BOB HH NOE BB HH HL HEHE IH BLE HE HOE BB HK HEHE HE BE BB HHL HOEBE MEH EL HH BB HBL HE HE HE ND BE HL BL HE EH SHIEK KEKE KEKE FA KK IKE LE RE EE. WG2 The first of the family, Narsai Kara, arrived in this country in 1906 at about the time when the Passive Resistance Movement was gathering momentum. He settled in Pretoria and opened a Laundery in the Asiatic Bazaar and traded as the Asiatic Laundery. About the twenty’s the business, moved to the new wash area built by the Municipality in Struben Street. Up to then, all washing was done in the Apies River. In 1927 Narsai Kara passed away, his wife had pre-deceased him some years before. He was born in Dhobi Taloo, Bombay, India, in 1891. His only son, Raghunath, started a Tailoring business in Boom Street in 1948 and traded as Narsi’s Tailors. Thanks to the prompting of two friends, Narjuileli Manjee and Habib K. Khoja, he broke into the Grain Bag business in 1959 and it is due to their encouragement and advice that the firm has prospered over the years. lcs NARSAI, Raghunath: Businessman. b. 6th November, 1915, Bombay, India. Educated: Bombay High, Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Narsai Kara. Origin: Bombay, India. Activities: Treasurer: Pretoria Rajput Mandal (Also served as President and Secretary); Member: South Africa and Rhodesia Rajput Mandal. Delegate to South Africa — Rhodesia Rajput Mandal, in all Provinces. Was Committee Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj (1948/58). Appt. Hindu Priest: Pretoria C. Prison — for Indian condemned. Rec.: Soccer — Keen Supporter of Swaraj F. C. (Pretoria). Well travelled. AH] African countries. Married: Hirabhai, daughter of Jina Kalyan of Bombay, India; S 2; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13015, Laudium, Pretoria; Res. Add.: 215 — 6th Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. The Raghunath Narsai Family of Pretoria HR HE EI HE RE NEE HOEHE NOEHE BH HOE RX HEHE HEHE HE HL IHL HHL BM HL HEH HOEBNE HL HOE HE HOE HE HEH HEB HOC NOL HEB BEB BO HL BE HL BB HE HEB HB HE HE HE Es-$-2-$-2 3 2-$-$-3-2-¢ 2.3.3.4 Uy NARSAI, Raghunath: Business- man. b. 6th Nov., 1915, Bombay, India. Educated: Bombay High, Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Narsai Kara. Origin: Bombay, India. Activities: Treasurer: Pre- toria Rajput Mandal (also served as President and Secretary); Member: past); Member: Transvaal Rajput Mandal (also served as President and Secretary); Member: South Africa and Rhodesia Rajput Man- dal. Delegate to South Africa — Rhodesia Rajput Mandal (1933/ 69), Transvaal Rajput Mandal, in atl Provinces. Was Com. Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj (1948/58). Appointed Hindu Priest: Pretoria C. Prison — for Indian condemned. Rec.; Soccer. Keen Supporter of Swaraj F.C. (Pretoria). Well travelled. All African countrigs. Married: Hirabhai, daughter of Jina Kalyan of Bombay, India; S$ 2: D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13015, Laudium, Pretoria; Res. Add.: 215 — 6th St., Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. “2 ubs HIRABHAI, R. Narsai: House- wife. b. Bombay, India. Edu.: Bai Kabibai Hindu High School, Bombay, India. Arrived in South Africa, 1941. Eldest daughter of Jina Kalyan of Bombay. Acts.: Member: Rajput Pretoria Mahela Mandal. Religious inclined — Fond of Gardening and Travel. Visited India, East Africa and P.E.A., numerous occasions. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN al WHO UG © NELSON, Louis: Trade Union Secretary. b. 16th January, 1922, Durban, Natal. Edu.: Prospect Hall, Kurma Reddy and Sastri College, Durban. Son of A. Narayadoo of Sialkot, India. Joined labour movement in 1941. Rose to Executive — Natal Liquor and Catering Council, L. and C.T., same year. Chairman and Vice Chairman: P. M. Burg L. and C. Trades since 1953, South Coast L. & C. Trades Industrial Council 1953 onwards. Apptd. Assessor to Industrial Tribunal 1963, 5 & 8. Rep. S. A. Workers at I-L.Q., 1964. Attended Int. Labour Secretariat, U.K. and Europe, 1968. U.K. Leadership Grant Labour and Social Welfare programmes by British Govt. Member: National Executive — Trade Council South Africa since 1961. Was Trustee, later Chairman: Area Div. ~ Trade Union Council, Natal, from 1935. Serves on Technical Com., [.L.Q. Hotel Catering and Allied Trades. Apptd. to S.A.J. Council, 1971. Member: M. L. Sultan Technical College since 1956. Chairman: Hotel and Catering Trades Division M. L. Sultan Technical College. Sport: Golf — Played in German, French Open. Married: Johanna Van der Linde; $ 3;D 2. Bus. Add.; 237 Goodhope Centre, Queen Street — Phone: 21370; Res. Add.: 45 Tarndale Avenue, Asherville, Dbn. Phone: 886873. 2 NOT NIAMATOOLA, Mohamed Rafik: Businessman. b. 14th April, 1913, Durban, Natal. Educated: Clairwood High School Done School. Son of Niamatoola Lall Mohamed. Origin: Lucknow, N. W. India. Was connected with Shell Oil Company — Island View — 1922/34. Operated own taxi business — 1934/50. Established own Motor Repair business — 1939 — Mohamed’s Motor Repairs. Moved to Isipingo Rail — 1963. Trades as “S. C. Panel Beating & Spray Painting”’. Interested in all matters affecting Indians. Keen on all Religious activites at the Rail. Rec.: Angling, Travel. Married: Fathima, daughter of Rahmatulla Bux of Mayville, Durban; S 6; D 4. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 103, Isipingo Rail, Natal Phone: 91627; Res. Add.: Isipingo Hills — 4 Sarojini Crest. NG6g NOORBHAY, Abdul Hamid: Businessman. b. 1915, Rander, India. Educated: Doornfontein Indian and Col. School, Eurafrica High School and Training Centre, Bree Street, Johannesburg. Son of Rahim Noorbhay. First entered business scene 1934 — family concern, Noorbhay & Sons. Estab. Selfast Outfitters 1956 — Managing Director. _ Activities: Vice Chairman: Randeér Mia Bhai Benefit Society, Talimul Madressa and Mosque Trust; Member: Parent/Teachers Association — Girls’ School. Rec.: Cricket, Soccer. Travel: P.E.A., East 235 Africa, Republic. Married: Rehmath Bibi, daughter of Goolam Naby of Durban; S 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: 31a Dela Rey Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg and 30a—14th St., Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Transvaal. WEF NOORBHAI;Essop Hoosen: Farmer and Businessman. b. 24th November, 1915, New Guelderland, Lower Tugela, North Coast. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School. Son of Hajee Hoosen Noorbhai of Stanger and Baleshwar, Dist. Surat, India. Sugar Farmer and Director of E. H. Noorbhai Investments. Activities: Trustee: Stanger Sunnee Muslim Congregation; Chairman: Stanger Anjuman Islam; Doring- kop Indian Mill Group; Past Vice Chairman: Natal Indian Mill Group Cane Growers Association; Stanger Sunnee Muslim Congregation; Past Secretary: Stanger Anjuman Islam. Contributed largely to welfare of comm. Rec.: Fishing and Literature; Married: S 1; D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 120, Stanger — Phone: 422; Res. Add.: Doringkop, Natal ~ Phone: 604. 10 NOSARKA, Essop M.: Business- man. Well-known businessman of Banks, Western Transvaal. Moved from Banks as a result of sink- holes in the area. Better known for his interest in Muslim educa- tion in South Africa. Prime mover behind the Muslim Univer- sity ideal. Is now permanently at Lenasia where he is now in busi- ness. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Was one of the best known personalities in the Western Transvaal. Bus. Add.: Bombay Silk Bazaar; Res. Add.: Lenasia, Transvaal, Republic of South Africa. uy NOWBATH, Ranji Seetharam: Attornery. b. 6th October, 1921, Newcastle, Natal. Son of S. S. Nowbath of Newcastle. Edu.: Sastri College, University of Natal and UNISA. Joined teaching pro- fession in 1953. Taught at various schools until 1967, also Sastri. Was in the newspaper field, 1941/ 49. Served in official capacities on F.O.S.A. Sec.: South African Hindu Maha Sabha; Vice Pres.: former Natal Indian Teacher’s Society. Was Editor of the “Lea- der” and “The Graphic” and Free Lance Journalist for some time. Resigned from teaching profession in 1967. Admitted to the Bar in 1971. Is an outstanding writer with a keenly analytical mind and an outspoken critic of government policies affecting non- Whites. Delivered numerous thought provoking lectures on contentious matters at various centres. Travel: India, Ceylon, African territories. Married: Roopkashi D. Lalla; S 1; D 1; Res. Add.: 25 Daintree Avenue, Asherville, Durban Phone: 881788.

---

## Page 21

236 haa GOVINDARAJALOO, Nulliah: Teacher, Businessman and Sports- man. Joined teaching profession 3 in 1928 at Greytown. Moved es ’ - Pinetown in 1929 when he quali- aay = } fied for his N.T.S.C. Established . % Pinetown Vegetable and Fruit ales House the same year — was one Fo ec, of the best known stopping places aie’ ‘ on the way to the coast. Managed vs . by family. Transferred to New- - < castle in 1934 (Pr. St. Oswalds 4 } / 1940/42) and Stanger — 1941. Umgeni Schoo} — Durban. Resign- ed in 1943 to take charge of busi- ness. Supermarket was completed in 1948. Active in various organisations. Was President: Pinetown Young Mens Association; Patron: Pinetown Football and Cricket Clubs; Foundation and Committee Member: Marianhill Hospital Fund Committee. Has travelled extensively: Visited India and Ceylon — 1958/59. Religious leanings: took him to most of India’s shrines and temples. Toured Great Britain, Europe, Scandinavian countries and Italy including the United States of America and Canada. Visited India in 1967. Was one of the finest centre-forwards South Africa has produced. Represented P. M. Burg between 1914/1926. Scored five of seven Goals in Cup Final against Royals Football Club; Scored two Goals for Natal XI versus All Transvaal at Johannesburg in 1924. Oppor- tunist Goal Scorer with explosive boot. Two footed. One of truly greats of the era. Married: Jogatham- bal, only sister of S. R. Naidoo of P. M. Burg; S 7; D 4. Unique family (six Doctors, 1 Dentist, a B.A. and B.Sc. and | Teacher). Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 89, Pinetown — Phone: 76351; Res. Add.: 28 Old Main Road, Pinetown, Phone: 76351. e on ew een re GE Ne eee, 1 SL HP > RM DA DD PLD > HA +P) ES EDA A DN, HR YM 1D FS >) OH > >) HO THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN “WHO'S WHO" The only publication of its kind in Southern Africa which provides for personalities in every field of Indian activity. When you think of advertising — there is no better medium A A AA HD DN +P DK PEO LY SD PN RE NE - - A A TE a SN DL DA <--> ED, NS 9-7 EN THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO nT NOWBATH, Leshumon: Storeman. b. 14th August, 1898, Greytown, Natal. Educated: Self-taught. Son of Nowbath Jokoo. Origin: Lucknow, India. Has been connected with N.N.C.D. Newcastle since 1917 (fifty three unbroken years with the same firm). Holds record of having been absent only 3% days over this period. Activities: Interested in all matters affecting Indians in Newcastle and District; Vice President: N.I.C. (1943 onwards). Was a Foundation Member of Newcastle Indian Ratepayers Association. Was also Treasurer of Hindu Temple. Charitably inclined, a contributor to various deserving causes over the years. Rec.: Angling, Golf. Married: Sookraji, daughter of S. Ramsoo- roop of Newcastle; D 6. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1, New- castle; Phone: 682; Res. Add.: 9 Harwick Street, New- castle — Phone: 682. ua} 'NAICKER, Gangathura, Mohgambry. B: 30th Sept., 1910, Durban. Edu.: Marine College, Edinburgh University & Dublin, Eire, MB. CHB. (Edin.) L.M. (Dub- lin) Qual. 1934 - Private Practice Durban. One of leading indian Political personalities of the post- war period. Responsible for ousting radical leadership under Anti - Segregation Council. Elected Chairman - 1945. Elected Pres. - Natal Indian Congress - same year. President of org. until banning in 1963. Was Pres. S.A.LC. 1948/51, 1954/62. Received- first banning order - 1948. Sentenced - 6 months - Passive Resistance Campaign, 1946, Further 6 months with hard labour, 1948. Treason trialist - 1955, Found Not Guilty, after protracted trail. Arrested again under Emergency Regulations - 1960. Compiler: “Synopsis of Anti-Indian Legistation in S.A.” Interests: Golf, Billiards, Table Tennis. M: Mariemuthoo Appavoo of De Aar, Cape. S1. D 1. Add.: 26 Short St., Durban. Phone: 23408. Res.: 87 Dunnottar Ave., Asherville, Durban. a Oe EE ee ee oe ee D> | i ° THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHOS WHO teats. DR. OLIDEEN Haroon: Medical Practitioner. b. 24th Nov., 1926, Durban, Natal. Educated: S.R.S. Govt. Durban. Quali.: B.Sc.-- Fort Hare ~ South Africa; M.B.B.S. (Madras). Son of Whoodoodeen. (Second). Qualified in 1958. Housemanship at General Hospi- tal — Madras, India. Was anasthae- tist at R.S.R.M. at Lying-in-Hos- pital ~ Royapuram, Madras — ¢ 1960. Was at K.E.H. — Durban (1965/67). Now practicing at Est- court. Travel: India, Pakistan, E.A., P.E.A., Rhodesia and Zam- bia. Activities: Member: Estcourt Indian Schoo! — Com.; Estcourt ‘Indian Local Affairs Com., — elected with highest number of votes, 1970 committee. Is a Trustee: Islamic Madressa — Overport, Durban. Patron: Estcourt I. C. Union. Rep.: Fort Hare — Soccer; Rec.: Cricket, Soccer, Bridge, Literature, Badminton. Married: Fawziah, Sayed Mohamed of Wasbank. Bus. Add.: 122 Albert St., Phone: 1038; Res. Add.: 119 Phillip Street, Estcourt. 237 || We ORDRA, Ahmed Suleman Hassim: Businessman. b. 6th October, 1925, Pretoria, Transvaal.. Educated: Pretoria Indian Boys High School; Pretoria M.’ Madressa. Son of S. H. Ordra of Ranavav, India. Established own business, 1956 — Ahmed Suleman (Pty.) Ltd. Pretoria better known as “Nu-Shop” Wholesale and Retail — Direct Importers. Interests: Islamic Studies and Literature. Acts.: Member: Laudium Islamic Trust; Transvaal Meman Asso.; Travel: India, Pakistan, M.E., E.A., P.E.A. Married: Zubeida, daughter of O. H. Mohamed; S 2; D 4; Bus. Add.: 179/181 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria — Phone: 25831; Res. See iad Cuprene Street, Laudium, Pretoria Phone: ¢ D> enews mm eH Yr ED A OR HO THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN “WHO'S WHO" is read by everyone because they find it informative and an interesting publication 1 A YR He I 1 1 | ER PS > A I SP I EE > DA SD DM DA > PR >) cS aan nn nat > em em em:

---

