# Southern Africa Indian Who's Who (1971-72)

**Book ID:** southern-africa-whos-who-1971-pt5
**Total Pages:** 13

---

## Page 1

122 The Joosub Habib Family of Pretoria 513 HAJEE, Aboobaker Joosub: Director; b. 20th August, 1930 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High School and Parkview Muslim Institute, Standerton, Second son of Joosub Habib of Pretoria. Joined family business in 1948, Director (1961). Keen Soccerite. Has travelled widely. Visited India and Pakistan (1959), U.K., M.E., and Europe, 1963. Haj — 1963; Married: Hajira, daughter of Hajee Joosub M. H. Joosub; § 3; D 3. Add.: 261 26th Street, Laudium; Phone: 796383. 64 ANVER, Joosub Habib: Director; b. 6th January, 1938 at Johannesburg; Educated: Pretoria High School, Son of Joosub Habib of Pretoria. Joined family business in 1955, Director (1962). Keen student — Economics and Mercan- tile Law. Has travelled extensively R.S.A., East and Central Africa, M.E., U.K., Europe, U.S.A. (1964). Visited the World Fair (New York). Europe - 1967. Attended the Basle Textile Machinery Fair; Res. Add.: 325 — Sth Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Republic of South Africa. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The pioneering member of the family, Joosub Habib, arrived in this country in 1901 and in the same year opened a wholesale business in Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. In 1923 he joined forces with Cassim Adam and Company and remained in partnership with the firm until 1930 when he established his own business under the name of Joosub Habib and Son. His elder son, Ismail, joined the firm as a working partner in 1933. Joosub Habib took a keen interest in all local activities and made several trips to India over the years. He was born in Ranavav, India in 1888. He died in January, 1948 at the age of sixty. Goo JOOSUB, Habib Ismail: Director of Companies; b. 12th April, 1916, Ranavav, India. Educated: Ranavav, India and Pretoria High. Eldest son of Joosub Habib of Pretoria. Arrived in South Africa in 1925. Joined family business — Joosub Habib & Sons — 1933. Managing Director — 1948. Activities: Treasurer: Ranavav Himayatul Islam (S.A.); Life Member: Memon Welfare Society of India and Pakis- tan. Built School Hall in memory of Parents at Ranavav, 1959. Also Home for the Poor at Karachi, 1960. Married: Kathija Ahmed Bawa; S 1; D 3; Widely travelled; Died: 1970;Family Address: 323 - Sth Avenue, Laudium, Pre- toria, Transvaal, Republic of South Africa. Go| HAJEE, Sikandar (Hajee Ismail J. Habib): Director; b. 28th May, 1943 at Pietersburg; Educated: Pretoria High School. Eldest son of Hajee Ismail Joosub Habib of Pretoria. Joined family concern in 1961 as a Director. Keen Soccerite, Tenhis and Bridge; Fond of Travel — India, Pakistan, Haj: 1968 and Middle East; Married: Farida Hajee Ismail Adam; S 1 Addis, 328.0 Sth Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Republic of South Africa. 602. H. Goolam Hoosen J. Habib: Director; b. 9th October, 1943 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Son of Joosub Habib of Pretoria. Joined family business in in 1961 — Director. Keen Soccerite, Tennis. Well travelled Haj: 1967, India and Pakistan, Central and East Africa; Married: Mahroonisha Hassim; S 1; Add.: 325 — Sth Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Republic of South Africa. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA aN WHO’S WHO 123 f=] HABIB, Suliman Joosub: Business- man. b. 29th November, 1932, Pretoria, Republic of South Africa. Educated: Pretoria Indian School. Origin: Ranavavy, India. Broke from parent firm — Joosub Habib & Sons — 1960 (Textile and General Soft Goods Merchants). Estab. own business. Wholesale firm S. Joosub in 1960. Also Importer from all countries. Keen in all Social, Sports and Cultural Activities in the Pretoria area. Sports: Tennis; Married: Roshan- ara, daughter of A. D. Mottiar of Johannesburg; S 1; D 1; Bus. Add.: 202a Boom Street, Pretoria; Phone: 31113; Res. Add.: 316 — 7th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. Republic of South Africa. fo HAFFEJEE, Ahmed Mohamed: Businessman; b. 9th February, 1913, Johannesburg, South Africa. Educated: Bree Street, Johannesburg; Son of Mohamed Hafejee. Origin: Lachpur, District Surat, India. First entered busi- ness scene, 1931. Established own business under the name of S. Mohamed & Co., General Merchants. One of largest produce dealers in the area. Activities: First Sec. and now Chairman: Madressa Himayatul Islam (Koster Muslim Institute); Committee Member: Koster Indian School Educational Committee; Rec.: Islamic Literature and al! Sports; Married: Hawa, S.M. Wadi of Koster; S 5; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 35, Koster; Phone: 35; Res. Add.: Koster, ““Cedrela” — Phone: 10. Ces HAFFEJEE, Suleman “Bully” M.: Furniture Salesman; b. 9th Oct., 1939, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Son of Mohamed M. Haffejec. Origin: Kacholi, India. Salesman on the staff of McNamey’s, Pietermaritzburg; Keen Sports- man; Soccer: Rep. Junior P. M. Burg and N. Natal XI’s. Captained matches in All-India Cup and Natal. Cricket Board of Control. Began Ist League Cricket, 1954/ 55 as sixteen year old. Has Rep. P. M. Burg since 1956. Was 12th man — v/s Kenya Tour Team. Toured the Rhodesias 1964. Played against Basil D’ Oliviera XI — 1960. Selected for Natal v/s Transvaal, 1961. Fine, aggressive Right Hand Bat - one of hardest hitters in Indian Cricket. Fine fielder and Leg Spin bowler. Rep. P. M. Burg and N. Natal on numerous occasions; Del.: Orientals C.C. to M.D.D.C.U.; Vice President: P. M. Burg District C. U. (1967/69); Member: Lotus Badminton Club; Sports: Cricket, Soccer, Athletics, Badminton; Bus. Add.: 29 Dartnell Road, Mountain Rise, Pietermaritzburg. 606 HAFFEJEE, Suleman Mohamed- Businessman; b. 14th January, 1933, Port Shepstone, Natal. Educated: Port Shepstone Indian School. Son of Mohamed Ebrahim Haffejee. Origin: Dahbel, District Surat, India and Port Shepstone, Natal. Established Watch-Repair and Spares and Music Saloon in 1954 — Sol’s Music Saloon. Is a Member of P.S.Y.M. Muslim Association; Port Shepstone 1. C. W. Society. Is a keen Cricketer and Soccerite Ismets Cricket Club and Panama F.C.; Member: Marburg Indian Ratepayers Association; Married: Mariam, daughter of Ebrahim Moosa of Port Shepstone; S 1; D 3; Bus. Add.: Mosque Buildings, 41b Reynolds Street, Port Shepstone; Phone: 434; Res. Add.: Marburg; Phone: 2411, Port Shepstone, Natal. HANKER, Ramrathan: Farmer; b. March, 1902, Isinembe, Upper Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Fairbreeze Indian School. Son of Hanker of Isinembe and Arejila, U.P., India. Farming in the Inanda and Isinembe areas of the North Coast. Elder Hanker, arrived in South Africa in 1895 and was attached to the Balcombe Estates near Stanger. He farmed on leased land at Isinembe after contract period. Ramrathan bought first farm in 1940 in the Isinembe area and elsewhere. Activities: Interested in all! Communal, Educational and Social matters affecting his people. Built school for community at Cranbrook at own expense in 1957. Committee Member: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Member: Maidstone Indian Mill Group; Vice Chairman: Vishwaroop Hindu Temple; Chairman: Kruis- fontein Welfare Society; Married: Soni Bhugan; S 9; D 4; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 41; Maidstone; Phone: 1904; Res. Add.: Isinembe; Phone: 1904. 608 HAJEE, Cassim, Mohamed Yusuf: Businessman. b. 19th August, 1930, Dundee, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. Indian School and Dannhauser. Son of Mohamed Yusuf Hajee of Dannhauser and Jodiya Kathiawad, India. Connected with family business scene, 1946 — Hajee’s Fruit Store, established 1935. Manages family garage — Moola’s Motors. Takes keen interest in all local activities. Is Treasurer: Dannhauser United C.C.; Was Treasurer now Committee Member: Dannhauser Islamic Society; Dann- hauser Islamic Society Educational Committee; Dann- hauser Indian S. A. School Educational Committee; Parents Committee: Dannhauser; Northern Natal Angling Club; Protea Society Club; Was Chairman and now Mem.: Dannhauser United F.C.; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Angling; Married: Rabia, daughter of Karim Adam of Oogies, Eastern Transvaal; S 4; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 47, Dannhauser: Phone: 42; Res. Add.: Camp Road, Phone: 22. cee HAMID, Haroon Abdul: Business- man; b. 8th January, 1911, Jas- ! walli, Kolaba District, India. Edu.: J a Paarl Congregation Indian School. OP eS Son of Abdul Hamid; Was with the firm of A. Jaffer & Co. until 1944, Established own business - 1942, H. A. Hamid & Co. at Landsowne, Retail Merchants. Also Cafe at same address; Travel: P.E.A., E.A., Botswana, India, Pakistan. Activities: Treasurer: Rehmania Anglo — Indian School Society; Chairman: Mohammedan Sunni Mosque — Harvey Road, Claremont; Treasurer and Past Chairman: South African Janjira Hapsani Society; Chairman: Jaswalli Education and Water-Welfare Society; Rec.: Motoring and Class; Indian Music, Urdu Poetry and Urdu Literature; Married: Amina, daughter of Omar Sonday of Valwat, India; S 3;D 2; Bus. Add.:.332 Lansdowne Road, Lansdowne, C.P.; Phone: 774806; Res. Add.: “Naseem House”, 3 Wurzburg Ave., Lansdowne,

---

## Page 2

124 = The % 4 : : Hargovan =: : F al : 2 amily : = x : of Durban 3 : : R Fo xX x F.,3 x x F 3 x x x x x F 3 % b3 Fi Fi F3 x x F 3 x x x x x x x % F3 x x Gio Born in Surat, India in 1888, Parbhoobhai Hargovan arrived in this country in 1806 at the age of eight. One of the early pioneers in the Produce business, he entered into partnership with his elder brother in 1916, the fore-runner to the present Hargovan empire in Commerce and_ Industry. Earlier, he had taken part in the Passive Resistance campaign in support of Mahatma Gandhi and at an early age, he was already Treasurer of the Indian Hawkers” Association between 1907 and 1912. Charitably inclined, his donations to various deserving causes have been outstanding. Amongst his donations, the gift of a classroom to the Surat Hindu School, a ward to the St. Aidan’s Hospital, and large sums to the M. L. Sultan Technical College and towards a temple in Surat, India, speak glowing of his generosity. Gu HARGOVAN, Nagin Parbhoobhai: Director of Companies; b. 17th December, 1915, Surat, India. Educated: Higher Grade School, Durban. Eldest son of Parbhoobhai Hargovan. Businessman. Joined family concern of P. Hargovan. Converted to Limited Liability Co. — P. Hargovan & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. A Director of the Hargovan Group of Companies. Other Activities: One of early pioneers in Indian film distribution and introduction. Was a Director: Mayville Theatres (Pty.) Ltd. Was Founder and Director: Liberty Building Society; Founder: Goodwill Club; Past Treasurer: Surat Hindu Association; Secretary: Hindu Crematorium Society; Member: Surat Hindu Educational Society; Has donated liberally to various institutions — Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust; Widely travelled. Other interests: Sports and Literature. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA ee. WHO'S WHO pi2 HARGOVAN, Heera Parbhoobhai: Director of Companies; b. 27th July, 1919. Educated: Higher Grade School, Durban. Business- man. Established Etna Stores in partnership with Nagin Re Hargovan; Director: Hargovan Group of Companies since 1945. Other activities: Member: Surat Hindu Association. HARGOVAN, Uthum Parbhoo- bhai; b. 17th May, 1923, Durban. Educated: Higher Grade School and Sastri College, Wits University. Joined family business — P. Hargovan — 1945, Director: Har- govan Group of Companies. Was based in India for five years in Export-Import trade. Returned to South Africa in 1950 to take control of P. Hargovan and Co. (Pty.) Ltd. Activities: Foundation Member and Treasurer: Bharat Club; Past Secretary and Trea- surer: Bharat C.C. Gi HARGOVAN, Chunilal Parbhoo- bhai: Medical Practitioner. b. 14th February, 1926, Durban. Edu.: Higher Grade, Sastri College, Edinburgh University and Glasgow. Quals.: L.R.C.P. and S. (Edin.); L.R.F.P.S. (Glas.). Qualified, 1952. Established Medical Practice in Durban, 1954. Widely travelled. Interests: Cricket and Literature. GIS HARGOVAN, Chabildas Parbhoo- bhai: Director of Companies; b. 15th July, 1928, Surat, India. Educated: Higher Grade School Director: P. Hargovan & Co. (Pty.) Ltd. and Hargovan Group of Companies; Interests: Tennis and Literature. and Sastri College, Durban; THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO HARIBHAL, Lallubhai: Author in Gujarati Language; b. Ist June, 1897, Undach, Bulsar District, India. Educated: Gujarati Verna- cular Undach, Son of Pema Hari- bhai. Began writing in 1935. Was previously a Member of the Patan- joli Yoga Movement of Kilapardi, India and entered the Order of Vedanta. Has written over sixty books based on Vedanta teachings. Is author of such works as “Urmi- Vilas”, “Wave of Knowledge”, “The Path of Advance”, “Song of Devotion” and “Gandhi, the Spiritual’. Is at present working on a book dedicated to the “Symbolism of the Figure Five, the Senses and Others”. Activities: Is a supporter of innumerable charities and trusts in the Republic and India. Has donated large sums to the Kshatuja Maha Sabha Educational Fund and tothe Parishada, Balsar, District Surat, India. Travel: An extensive traveller — has visited all the Shrines in India. Toured Zambia, Rhodesia and all African territories; Married: Paravatiben, daughter of Kara Govind; S 2; D 1; Res. Add.: 101 St. Georges Street, East London; Phone: 26222. 3X HE HE A HA HH HK HK KE NE EE 618 The first member of this well- known family to arrive in this country was Khetsi Haribhai who — settled in Durban. After several Phase — o years in employment he establish- Ag ed the first of his businesses in yan the war years and in 1919, he I » entered into partnership with ; H. H. Dhupelia, trading as K. ” Haribhai until 1924, when the , partnership was dissolved. From ¢ this period onwards K. Haribhai 3 j continued trading under his own name, specialising in Produce. He made numerous trips to India over the years. He was a keen supporter of M. K. Gandhi during the Passive Resistance struggle and took an active interest in all matters affecting the. Indian community. He was a foundation member of the Kathiawad Seva Samaj and a suppotter of various deserving causes in the city and in India. He retired from active business in 1937. Born in Kathiawad, India in.1878, he died in Durban in 1960 at the age of eighty two. The firm is now run by his four sons. The directors being C.K., R.K., P.K., and L.K. Haribhai. FH SE HE EE KE BK II BB BHA SHE EI HK HBB HBL HR BLEAK EI HE BE HEHE RE HEE HE BOL HE HOE EB IK HH IH BH BBL HHH HE HEHE NE HE IE BE RH RL IE EI II The K. Haribhai Family of Durban BE XE EH BE BKB BR KK LI BH HL BE HE BE BE HEHE IK HA HEA HEE BH HH HB BLL HE BEE HE HE HE BBL HE HE I BB HE HB HH HE HE HE HE BOK BE 617 125 HASHIM, Abdussalaam, A. R.: Businessman; b. Ist July, 1935. Khaira-khurd, Koleba District, India. Educated: Habibia Primary, Alexander Indian School and Athlone High. Son of Abdurah- man Hashim. Origin: Wadoli, Kolaba. Arrived in South Africa in 1939. Joined family business — Universal Butchery — 1955. One of leading Social, Cultural, Religious and Sports workers in the area. Has taken part in almost every local activites. Activities: Presi- dent: E-Nor Rose C.C., — Elsies River; Treasurer: Western Province (Rylands) Sports Board; Former Secretary: Habibia Siddiqui Muslim Brigade; Exec. Member: Muslim Butchers Association, Elsies River Muslim’ Educational: Society, now Assistant Secretary: Jamat-ul Muslemin — Wadoli (Cape Town Branch); Rec.: Soccer, Cricket; Married: Momina, daughter of Hishamoodien Hoosen of Cape Town; S 4; D 1; Bus. Add.: 284 Halt Road, Elsies River; Phone: 988391; Res. Add.: 286 Halt Road, Elsies River; Phone: 988391. ES 2 $-$-2-¢-2-2-2-2.5-2. 5.5 619 HARIBHAI, Chimanlal, Khetsi: Businessman; b. Durban, Natal, 1927. Educated: India (Vernacu- jar), St. Anthonys and Greyville Durban; M. L. Sultan Technical College (Diploma — Bookkeeping). Eldest son of Khetsi Haribhai. : ~~ J Joined family business in 1944. —— Was Manager of K. Haribhai until 1956 when the firm became a Limited Liability Co. Is now a> Managing Director of K. Haribhai i4 & Sons (Pty.) Ltd. — Stockists and G Importers — Indian condinemts ; Spices and Indian groceries. Other Activities: Member: Natal Chamber of Industies (Indian Division); Asso. Member: Durban Chamber of Commerce; Chairman: Parent/Teachers’ Association and Education Committee:— Kathiawad Seva Samaj and Divine Life Society. Also connected with various other Social, Edu- cational, Welfare and Religious bodies. Married: Saryubala, daughter of Dharamshi Jethalal; S 2; D 3; Bus. Add.: 79 Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 28298; Res. Add.: 79 Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 24617.

---

## Page 3

126 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HO HO AH AHO AIT LITT II SOIL ITO IIIA TALI EEE HEB BI BTA BIH EERE HE G2° Son of the early pioneer, Ismail Hassim, one: of the first of the Timber Merchants to trade in Natal, Dawood Ismail Hassim was born in Jodiya, India, in 1910. He settled in this country at an early age and after receiving his educa- tion at St. Anthony’s and later at the Higher Grade School, he joined E. Suleman Bros. which was established by his father at the turn of the century. From 1927 until his death in 1958, Dawood Hassim ran the parent firm which still continues as E. Suleman Bros. in Queen Street, Durban. It is now run by his family. A keen Sportsman, he played Soccer for Kathiawad and also took part in the Cutch tournament. He was also an excellent Tennis Player. He died in April, 1958 at the age of forty eight. Gz] ISMAIL, Ahmed Dawood: Commercial T raveller; b. Lith December, 1929. Eldest son of Dawood Ismail. Educated: Greyville Indian School; Rec.: Table Tennis. Has been associated with South-wood & Co. for last six years; Res. Add.: 172 First Avenue, Durban; Phone: 20356. 622 ISMAIL, Osman, Dawood: Director; Second son of Da- wood Ismail. Educated: Greyville Indian School. Managing Director: E. Suleman Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. Joined family business in 1949; Married: Mariam Essa Essack of Bombay. S 1; D 2; Travel: India and Pakistan (1948/53); MLE. and African territories; Res. Add.: 458 Brickfield Road, Nagina Court, Durban (1969); Phone: 881520. The Dawood Ismail Hassim Family of Durban HAH HAITI TITIES TOLLED A IAI ISIS IID ADO HILL RE BREE IIIB IA HP PEK KH PRAM 623 ISMAIL, Hassim Dawood: Businessman, Educated: Grey- ville and Sastri College; Managing Director: Nagina Super Market, Brickfield Road, Durban; Married: Zuibunissa, Moosa; D 1; Rec.: Cricket; Res. Add.: 24 Kismet Arcade, Prince Edward Street, Durban; Phone: 61827. Gly ISMAIL, Ebrahim Dawood: Director; b. 11th December, 1943. Educated: Greyville Indian School and M. L. Sultan Technical College. Director: E. Suleman Bros. and Nagina Super Market; Married: Ayesha E. I. Mitha of Tongaat;S 1; D 1; Rec.: Table Tennis (Natal Junior — Singles and Doubles). Rep. Natal 1954 Interprovincial Tournament. 62S YUNUS, Ismail Hassim: Businessman; b. 10th October, 1940 at Durban, Natal. Educated: May Street, Madressa — Greyville — M. L. Sultan Technical College — Sastri College. Fourth son of Late Ismail Hassim. Origin: Jodiya, India. Joined family business, 1965 — E. Suleman Bros. Established business — Tongaat Timber Hardware in 1969. Was previously with A. I. Kajee — Durban; Travel: India, Pakistan and M. E. Takes a keen interest in all local acts. pus Cricket; Married: Halima, daughter of Hassim Gani of Tongaat; S 2; Bus. Add.: P.O, Box 130, Watson Street, Tongaat; Phone: ‘Ext. 305. Gu ISMAIL, Mohamed Farouk C.: Director; b. 2nd January, 1950 at Durban, Natal. Eldest son of Osman Ismail. Edu.: Greyville and M. L. Sultan Technical College; Origin: Jodiya. Joined family business E. Suleman — 1969. Is now Director of Nagina Super Marke. and Tongaat Timber & Hardware;Rec.: Table Tennis; Bus. Add.: 458 Brickfield Road, Durban; Phone: 881520; Res. Add.: 458 Brickfield Road, Nagina Court, Durban; Phone: 88150. THE SQUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HH RE ME XE RE REITER HARK KM ow Ty HAJEE ESSA HASSIM was born in Jodiya, India in 1895. Arrived in South Africa, 1907. Educated: Jodiya and Higher Grade, Durban. Pioneer and one of leading Indian Timber Merchants in this country. Established Essa Hassim — 1917. Activities: Was Trustee: Juma Musjid, Durban and Jodiya Mad- ressa Trust, India. Visited India, Pakistan and M.E., numerous times. Unobstrusive worker in Welfare and Social fields. Bus. Add.: 337 Pine Street, Durban. Died 1972. 23 AHMED, Essa Hassim: b. 1915 in India. Eldest son of Essa Hassim. Joined firm in 1932. Educated: Mitchell Crescent and Higher Grade. Has travelled extensively, Europe and the East. His entry into the family saw the greatest advance into the local industry and commercial fields. 624 OSMAN, Essa Hassim: b. Durban Natl, 2Ist June, 1921. Second son of Essa Hassim. Educated: Higher Grade Indian School. Travelled extensively. Joined firm in 1940. In charge oi finances; M.E, in 1955. : 127 PERE EK KEK HA REIKI BK EIA BL HEH BA HEH HK KK BEB KEI AL HEI BA HE HOEBH HHL EB BBE BOE BH HE BEB HOE BH AL BEB BK HEH BB HE I HE HEH HEH HE HK HE XE The Hajee Essa Hassim Family of Durban FEE HE LXE EEE Pee ttt ¢-t-$-2-¢-5.2 ¢ $55.2 -2-2.5-¢-:2-2-$-8-$-$-$--2-4-S-f-t-$ 5 25-5 5.5 2 Sf sce ess SSS Ed RHE IE KEEBLE HOH (30 EBRAHIM, Essa Hassim: b. 1926, Durban, Natal. Third son of Essa - Hassim. Widely travelled; . Join- ed firm in 1947. Educated: Sastri College and M. L. Sultan Technical College. In charge of the Whole- sale section in Queen Street; Rec.: Literature. G3| FAROUK, Ahmed Hassim: Third generation — joined firm recently. Visited India and M.E. in 1967. 632 HAJEE, Valli Essa Hassim: Popular figure in Queen Street, Durban. Youngest of the Essa Hassims; Born 31st August, 1931. Travelled widely — M.E. in 1956 India and Pakistan. !

---

## Page 4

128 BY XK BK BK BK RKB BX BK BK IK HA IK BA BK SSK BK HSH BK GR HB HE HEHE HEHE BE HR HE HEB RE HEH HE HEH HH BEE AE HEHEHE REE HH HE BOE BB HE EH HE REE DE HE HES OE BORK EDK HEE EI HE XE HEME THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Hassim Family of Johannesburg FAKE BK ERA REIE BEI HA HEB HEHE HE ME HEH BE BOE HE HE BL I HE I BE BE BE HE SK SO BK MOE BK SOE I SOESH SOESHAE SE HE BH BOE I SH HE BK HE IK HM HI HE HH HOB HE BK I I OE GS3 SHAIKH HASSIM, the first of the Hassims of Johannesburg arrived in this country during the latter part of the century and setticd in Durban in the Sydenham area. He had been previously attached to the Customs at Shangai and Hong Kong and was transferred to Port Natal to the local Customs.: He was one of the few Indians to arrive here who spoke Chinese fluently. He was obviously fluent in English as well and was well versed in the vernacular. His collection of books were “a ’s calibre. He later settled in Johannesburg an oe tah demand as a Court Interpreter to the Chinese coolies who worked on the mines. He died in Joharines- burg in 1909. The eldest son of Shaikh Hassim was Mustapha Hassim who was bor at Sydenham, Durban, in 1892. He had his early education at Higher Grade School and later attended the St. Aidans College. The family moved to Johannesburg after the Boer War and Mustapha Hassim lost his father at this stage. The year 1909, saw the establishment of his Bookkeeping Agency ud Company Secretoriat at the corner of Rissik and Market Streets. He took a keen interest in all local activities and was a sup- porter of numerous deserving causes, He died in 1941 at the age of forty nine. He was survived by his six sons and three daughters. FHSAA EE HEMEL EEE x THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO THE HASSIM FAMILY Continued... Cay HASSIM, Eusuph Mustapha: Eld- est son of the late Mustapha Hassim. b. 15th January, 1919, Durban. Edu.: Johannesburg’s Eurafrican. College, University of Witwatersrand London University. Associate of The Society of Mo- tion Picture and Television Engineers. Business Executive. E. H. Hassim with his brother, H. M. Hassim, were instrumental in uplifting the cinema industry. They brought the cinema to a very high level in culture and enter- tainment. They were the first to introduce 3-D; Cinemascope; 70 mm and stereophonic sound in South Africa. They built the most modern and functional cinema in this country and received the World Wide Exhibitor Award for the best cinema of 1951 (under 800 seats). They received the Motion Picture Herald Citation for Excellance in Theatre Management. First to introduce Foreign Films to the public. First to install Closed Circuit Television in South Africa to screen Apollo 12, to the non-White people. Managing Director. Lyric Cinemas 1942 (Pty.) Ltd. Travelled extensively. His Special interests in Art, Architecture and Theatre. Past Secretary: Transvaal Indian Lawn Tennis Association and South African Lawn Tennis Association; Trustee: Union of South African Artists. Bus. Add.: Lyric, 91 Central Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg — P. 0. Box 6002 — Telephone: 838-4267; Res. Add.: 91 Mint Road, Fordsburg, Johan- nesburg ~ Telephone: 838-6053. 635° 129 HASHIM, Mustapha Hassim: 2nd son of late Mustapha Hassim. b. Lith, March, 1921, Johannesburg, Edu.: Bree St. Indian School; California and Harvard Universi- ties, U.S.A.; Business Executive. Member of the Hassim team in cinema, entertainment, showbiz and close circuit television. Manager and Dire-tor: Lyric Cinemas (1942) (Pty.) Ltd. Further study ended with death of P| > ? father in 1941. Responsible for . educating the four younger brothers through Medical careers. Has contributed considerably towards the welfare of the community in Cultural Activities. Education and Sports. Hobby: Collector of Classical Literature. Travelled widely. Married: Sybil; S 1: D 2; Bus. Add.: 91 Central Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg. — Telephone: 838-4267; Res. Add.: 81 Central Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg; Tel.: 838-6053 — P.O. Box 6002, Johannesburg, Tvl. £36 MOHAMED, Amin Hassim: Younges: son of late Mustapha Hassim; b. 1938, Johannesburg. Edu.: Bree Street Indian School, University of Witwatersrand — M.B.; Ch.B (Rand). Keen Tennis Player. Has assisted in establishing Tennis in Western Transvaal. Medical Practitioner; Married : Farida, Add.: 30 Joubert Street, Krugersdorp, Tel.: Krugersdorp — 660-4533. 637 AKBAR, Mustapha Hassim: Third son of late Mustapha Hassim. b. 1928, Johannesburg. Educated: Bree Street Indian School, University of Witwatersrand, University of Liverpoo! — B.Sc., L.R.C.P. and L.R.C.S. (Edinburgh), Medical Practitioner, . ABUBAKR, Mustapha Nassim: Fourth son of late Mustap- ha Hassim. b. 1930, Johannesburg. Educated: Bree Street Indian School, University of Witwatersrand, University of Londen and Oxford — B.Sc.; M.B.; Ch.B (Rand) M.R.C.O.G. (London). Sub-Chief: Baragwanagh Hospital; Head of Department Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Uni- versity of Zambia. Now Professor Gynaecology .and Obstetrics, School of Medicine, University of Zambia. Consultant in Gynaecology and Obstetrics (London). Research in special problems of African women. Many important papers read at World Gynaecological Congress in Sydney, Oxford Mexico, Indonesia and Tokyo. Married: Cynthia; § 1; D 2; Add.: Lusaka Central Hospital, Lusaka, Zambia. G3 ABDUL, Quadir Hassim: Fifth son of late Mustapha Hassim. b. 1932, Johannesburg; Edu.: Bree Street Indian School, University of Witwatersrand — M.B.: Ch.B (Rand), Medical Practitioner. Interested in all sports activities, Married: Hawa, D 1; Add.: 17 Gibson Street, Uitenhage, Cape ~ Telephone Uitenhage 23708. t

---

## Page 5

130 EE TE IE IE HE EB EEE HE SRA A I AIE HHA AIEEE AAA ITI bt+O Hassim Noor Mohamed was the first of the Hassims of Potchefstroom and arrived here in 1897. He was one of the few who landed in the Cape Province. He moved to the Transvaal some years later and as a self-taught Bookkeeper was known in the area as Hassim “Bookee”. He joined A,R.A. Ganie as a Partner in 1916 and in 1929 he estab- lished the first of his businesses as H.N. Mohamed & Sons. In 1939 he founded Noor Bargain Bazaar (Pty.) Ltd. with four of his sons as Directors. He took a keen interest in every activity and was. instrumental in the establishment of the local school. He was also a Chairman and later Trustee of the Mohammedan Mosque Trust. He died in 1963 at the age of seventy eight. He was born in Bhanvad — India, 1885. 6+ \ MOOSA, Hassim: Director of Companies; b. 10th July, 1915 at Bhanvad, India. Educated: Potchefstroom. Fourth son of Hassim Noor Mohamed of Bhan- vad and Potchefstroom. Joined firm of H. N. Mohamed & Sons, 1929. Now Director of N. B. Wholesalers and Subsidiaries. Managing Director: Textile Divi- sion. Widely travelled: ULK., Europe, M.E., India, Pakistan and African territories. al JOOSUB, Hassim: Director of Companies; b. 19th April, 1923, Bhanvad, India. Educated: Potchefstroom Indian School and Sastri College. Son of Hassim Noor Mohamed. Joined family business, 1948 — N. B. Wholesalers. Now Senior Director since 1961. Director: Rydhan Estates, Smile- bro Estates, Kohinoor Cinema, Joosub Hassim Family Trust, N.B. Wholesale Holdings. Other Acts.: Patron: Western Transvaal Tennis Union; Western Transvaal Cricket Union; Chairman: Potchefstroom Muslim Congregation, Potchefstroom indian Community. Also connected with various other Social and Cultural Organisations; Rec.: The Hassim Family of Potcheistroom HHO HHA ETL OE THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HSH HHH AEA ITT L ESI IIIT LIA IIIT IA HHA: RARRRR Cricket, Tennis, Soccer, Married: Hajira A. Latif; S 3;D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 90, Potchefstroom; Phone: 4381. Res.: 40 Maherry Street, Potchefstroom ;Phone: 4381. C42 EBRAHIM, Hassim: Director of Companies; b. May, 1909, Bhan- vad, India. Educated: Bhanvad, India. Second son of Hassim N. Mohamed of Bhanvad and Potchefstroom. Joined father’s firm — H. N. Mohamed & Sons, 1929. Was Senior Director of N. B. Wholesale and Subsidiaries. Widely travelled India, Pakistan and African countries; Died: 11th March, 1971. 643 MOHAMED, Hoosen Ismail Has- sim: b. 16th December, 1937 at Bhanvad, India. Eldest son of Late Mr. Ismail Hassim of Potchef- stroom. Educated: Potchefstroom Govt. School, Joined family con- cern of N. B. Wholesale, 1953, Also Director (1969) of Subsidia- ries. Sports: Tennis and Soccer. Married: Zubeida, daughter of Joosub Carrim of Potchefstroom, 53. bY OMAR, Ahmed Hassim: Director; b, 25th May, 1929 at Potchef- stroom, Transvaal. Eldest son of Late Ahmed Hassim of Potchef- stroom. Educated: Potchefstroom indian School. Joined family con- cern of N. B. Whoiesalers, 1956. Director (1969), also sut idiaries. Sports: Tennis and Weight-Lifting, Married: Kulsum, daughter of Carrim Essa of Moodville, Rusten- burg; S 1; D 1; Hobbies: Photo- graphy; Travel: India, Pakist: M.E. and A ; countrie THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO | 131 aaa: BREE REI BOB HK HE EBD BB BH HE BEI EH BO The A. K. Hoosen Family of Durban 3 : ¥ : ots HOOSEN, Abdul Karim: Timber Merchant; b. 1896, Jodiya, Sau- rastra, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1908. Son of Hoosen Mahomed. Educated: Jodiya, India. Was previously in Timber business in Bombay and Nagpur, India. Established Timber Bustness — A. K. Hoosen — 1930. Was one of leading merchants in this class of the trade. One of the first Indians to build a sky-scraper in South Africa. Has been an active member of various organisations for many years. Served as Secre- tary to the All-India Memon Conference (Prov. Comm, Durban); Past Secretary: Memon Educational and Welfare Society ; Life Member: Iqbal Study Group, Durban. Is also a Director of Newfaze Properties (Pty.) Ltd.; Momin Invs. (Pty.) Ltd. and numerous other subs. Co’s in South Afri- ca and overseas. Charitably inclined, has contributed to many deserving causes in South Africa and India. Joint contributor in the establishment of the Jodiya Madressa Building, Jodiya, India. Married: Hawabie, daughter of Mitha Osman; S 2; D 3; Bus. Add.: 116 Queen Street Durban: Phone: 27349; Res. Add.: 297 Brickfield Road. Durban; Phone: 20515. : £+7 OSMAN, Abdul Karim: b. 14th January, 1935, Durban, Natal. Educated : Greyville Indian School. Building Demolisner and Mer- chant. Is a Director — Speedy Demolishers, Durban. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Isa Director of various Co’s of the A. K. Hoosen Group. Sports: Cricket and Soccer. Has travelled extensively India, Pakistan, M.E., Europe :nd U.K. and on Pilgrim- age. Married: Amina, daughter of a a Mitha; S 3; D 3; Bus. .. 16 Goodhope Certr Street, urban; Phone: 27348; Res. Add.: 29° Wriokfield Road, Durban; Phone: 20515. SHIEK I BK IH XE HEE BH HEHEHE KE HBB BO BE HE HEH BK BA HB IH HE BK HO HE HER HLH BB HE HOEBOEHOE EB BK BO HL HEEHE BK BX BO IAB HEH HAEHA BB BBE EB HK BB IK BEER KE HEME KE XE HE XE HARK S4G MAHOMED, Habib Abdul Karim: Director of Companies; Eldest son of A. K. Hoosen; b. December, 1923, Jodiya, India. Arrived in South Africa 1933; Educated: Carlisle Street and Greyville; Public spirited. Has Managed, financed and founded numerous Social, Cultural, Educational and Sports bodies. Has also served as Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer on such bodies as Iqbal Study Group, various Football Clubs, pet pene Society; Memon : ssociation; Natal Memo : Paradise Club; Muslim Darul Yattama Wal “deta hd appointed Commissioner of Oaths in 1955. Widely travelled ~ performed Haj twice. Joined parent firm in 1947. Is now Managing Director of the A. K. Hoosen Group of Co’s er je) = ie pee Street, Durban; Phone: 27348; Res. ES an Es Prantcanere ssendene Road, Overport, Durban, He GULAM, Hoosen Karim: Business- man; b. 1952, Durban, Natal. Son of Mahomed Habib Karim. Edu.: Orient High and King’s College, Pakistan. Is at present doing an Engineering Course (Part-time). Also Manager, Cut-price Cosmetic Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd. Connected with various other Parent Group of Companies; Sport: Swimming. Cea ABDUL, Lattif Karim: Business- man; b. 1952, Durban, Natal. Son of Mahomed Habib Karim. Edu.: Windsor High, Ladysmith and King’s College, Pakistan. Interested in Photography and Classical Music. Connected with Parent Co., A. K. Hoosen & Sons. Travel: India, Pakistan, M.E. and P.E.A.

---

## Page 6

132 Kes HATIA, Essop Ismail: Business- BHO, man. b. 1907, Panoli, District Surat, India. Educated: Panoli and ‘ Johannesburg. Son of Ismail Hatia. ( reviously in the Lichtenburg Was p i ey (Bakersville) area — Ismail Essop ¥ /y/ — & Co. Moved to Bloemhof — dist. % ah (London farm) — 1929 — trading as A. E. Ismail. Joined Lackhi & Co. in 1937 as Partner. Took sole a c Jf charge, 1940 at tragic death of , prother. Is a Director of several 1 4 subsidiaries. Was one of founder members of the local Jamaat and school. Activities: ben Sepa ary: Bloemhof Muslim Jamaat; Member: Bioem- a “tiie Rcapal Educational Committee; Rec.: Cricket; Travel: India, M.E., Pakistan, South America, BAS P.E.A. Married: Amina, daughter of Ismail Moola of Stanger; 84; D 4; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 15, Bloemhof; Phone: 25; Res. Add.: 24 Market Street, Bloemhof; Phone: 79. 6S HATTIA, Ahmed Sadeck Suleman: Businessman; b. 22nd April, 1931, Greytown, Natal. Educated: Greytown Govt. Indian School. Son of Mohamed Suleman Hattia of Greytown. Originally associated with the firm of Mall’s (Pty.) Ltd. Opened own business — Avalon Fruiterers = 1960. Also established following subsidiaries: — Avalon Transport, Avalon Wholesale Dists., Avalon Service Station. Other Activities: Trustee and Chairman: Wasbank Madressa Islamic Trust; Chairman: Indian Advisory Board — Local Health Committee; Rec.: Tennis; Married: Amina, daughter of M. S. Mall of Wasbank; S 2; D 1; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 5, Phone: 38, Wasbank; Res. Add.: Station Road, Phone: 38. F ater essman; b. 2nd July Nandlal: Farmer an usin ‘De j pelts St Natal. Educated: Shakaskraal and Stanger High. Son of Hiblal Kanhyealal (Kanhailal) and grandson of Kanhailal. Sidar of Makka Barwa, ULP., India. Isa Cane Farmer and Transport Operator since 1957 in the District, Lower Tugela. Takes keen interest in all Religious, Cultural, Educational and Social matters affecting community : Activities: Chairman: Inder and Kali Puja Association; Committee Member: Shakaskraal Indian Mill Group. Rec.: Angling; Married; Chanderamanee Rampersadh of Syden- ham, Durban; S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 9, Shakas- kraal, Natal; Res. Add.: Main North Coast Road, Shakas- kraal, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HOOSEN, Cassim Ahmed: Direc- tor of Companies; b. 3rd January, 1933, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Shree Gopal and Verulam Primary School. Son of Ahmed Hoosen of Verulam, Natal. Businessman, Garage Owner, Dry Cleaners. Established in 1951. Member: Verulam Y.M.M.A., Verulam Ind. Centenary Trust Board; Verulam Ratepayers Association; P/Teach- ers Association; Verulam Madressa, Mosque - Working Committee; Chairman: Y. M. Relief Society, Patron of various sports ier: Treasurer: Young Victoria Angling Club; Director: Paama Properties, Mosel Investment Corp. Appointed to oe Local Affairs Committee of Verulam in 1965. Stood for election Local Affairs 1966 (First All-Indian in S. Africa). Married: $ 1;D 4; Rec.: Fishing, Soccer and Music. Bus. Add.: 12 Moss Street, Verulam; Phone: 145; Res. Add.: 14 Moss Street, Verulam; Phone: 3. EN, Hajee Sayed Ahmed. Ismail: Businessman and Bt b. ith yaeeiter, 1925, Gao Kalusta, Bombay. India. Educated: Kalusta, St. Georges Primary and Livingstene High. Son of Hajee Sayed Ismail eet | Was previously a teacher of Arabic in India. First ae business scene in 1944 — Sayed Ismail & Sons. Establishe Sayed’s Cash Store, 1958 — Wholesale and Retail. Keen educationist. Established first of private schools — Kalusta; 1965 opened private schools — Kensington - Cravenby and Factreton, Cape Province, 1963 igh baa Principal of schools. Also runs library — Hajee S. Ismai Library at Kalusta. Travel: Italy, Greece, een ee Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon, East Africa, P.E.A., India and Pakistan. Activities: Patron: Crescent Cc (Kalusta); Trustee: Hidayat-ul Islam — Kensington and Assistant Imam and Trustee: Islamic Jamaat — Factreton; Member: Cravenby Welfare Association; President: Hajee saree Ismail Muslim Brigade; Member and Office Bearer 0 various other organisations. Rec.: Cricket, Classical Urdu Music, Urdu, Arabic and English Literature; Married ; Soe D 5; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 21, 1 Hoosens Building, Mur- ton and Klipfontein Roads, Rylands Estate, Athlone, Phone: 698033. Res. Add.: Same as Business address. 6éss HARRIPERSAD. Senior Cons- table - S.A.P. B: 11th Feb., 1910, Verulam, Natal. S/s/oSukhnandan, Sugar Farmer, Oakford, Verulam, Ntl. Joined S.A.P. in 1938. Sta- tioned at Howick. Now retired since 1971. Popular figure, In- terested in all local acts. Mem.: Howick Hindu Dharma Sabha since 1945. M: Seerdaye Bachan .of Stanger. Si. D2. Add: S.A.P., Howick, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 133 6S] ISMAIL, Ahmed: Builder; b. 14th February, 1929, Glen- coe, Natal. Educated: Waschbank G. School. Son of Ismail Omar Ally. Began building operations in 1948 as Ahmed Ismail, now Ahmed Ismail & Sons — Builders and Contrac- tors. Was instrumental in the completion of Soofie Masjid, Ladysmith. Contractors of major building projects, schools, commercial and industrial undertakings. One of leading builders in Northern Natal. Activities: Patron: Ottomans F.C., Ladysmith; Stars F.C.; Member: Ladysmith Indian Ratepayers Association; Amalgamated Union of indian Builders; Sports: Soccer (Stars F.C.); Married: Hawa Bibi, (Deceased). Second daughter of A. Jamsloodeen of Lady- smith. S 2; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 499, Ladysmith; Phone: 1147; Res. Add.: 57 Forbes Street, Ladysmith, Natal. Ge i: ISMAIL, Abdool Gaffoor, Dry- Cleaning Merchant; b. 11th Nov., 1937, Brits, Transvaal. Educated: Brits Govt. Indian and Coloured School. Son of Ismail Ahmed. Origin: Porbander, India. Was connected with family wholesale business — Star Wholesalers — 1948/1960. Only Indian owned established in Brits. Is interested in all local activities. Other Activities: Secretary: Brits Sports Club (Soccer and Cricket); Mem.: Brits Tennis Club; Brits Indian = Civic Association; Brits Muslim Jamaat; Sports: Cricket, Tennis, Soccer; Travel: Rhodesia, Zambia, P.E.A., African territories. Married: Farida, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Ismail Lattif (Zeerust, Transvaal); D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 441, Brits; Phone: 786; Res. Add.: 58 Tom Street, Brits; Phone: 786. 6s ISMAIL, Al-Haj Ebrahim Haffejee: (“E.H.”’). Businessman. Educated: Umzinto Indian School and Higher Grade. Son of Haffejee Ismail. Origin: Kathor, District Surat, India. H/L/V/P: Natal Amateur Weight/Lifting and Physical Culture Association; (Was Pres. sident from inception of Natal Body and Past Treasurer: South African Amateur W/L and Physical Cultural Federation. Was associa- ted with Natal Tennis (forty two years) and was also captain of Spes Bona Tennis Club (thirteen years); President: D. & D. Retailers Association from 1949, D. & D. Muslim Society. Highest Donor of trophies and medals to sporting culture and education organisations; President: International Photographic Society, several Social, Educational and Cultural bodies and institutions over the years. Patron: Reservoir Hills Muslim Society and Committee Member: Reservoir Hills Ratepayers Associa- tion; Associated with Boy Scouts Movement. President and \ Treasurer: Natal Boys Scouts Association for a number of years. Donor — Ward — F.O.S.A. Director of Companies, Real Estate, Insurance & Financial agent. Was appointed Commissioner of Oaths — 1942. Was Free lance reporter and shipping corr. Was associated with the “Leader” and “THe Sportsman”. Has travelled widely — Europe and U.K., M.E., India, Pakistan, Mauritius, Madagascar and _Reunion; Past President: Natal Table Fennis Union for seventeen years. Rec.: Photography and Religious study. Bus. Add.: 50 Commercial Road, Durban; Phone: 22481 — Res. Add.: “Darul Aman”, 74 Mount, Batten Drive, Reservoir Hills, Phone: 855605. Died: 1972. 660 ISMAIL, Hoosen Mohamed: Businessman; b. August, 1913, Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: Vrededorp Govt. School. Son of Mohamed Ismail. Established Islamic Butchery, 1963. Was previously at Lady Selborne, Pretoria. 1949/63. Keen on Sports Administration. Ex. refree and umpire — Northern Transvaal; Rep. and Club. Donated Floating Trophy — Ismail & Sons — Northern Transvaal Cricket. Activities: Past Treasurer: Pretoria District Ind. Cricket Union; Delector and Misconduct Committee — N.T.C.U.; Associated with local Soccer, 1936/53. Vice President: N.T.C.U.; Travel: India, P.E.A. and Kenya. Rec.: Cricket, Religious Literature; Married: Fathima, daughter of Abdulla Essack of Bombay, India; $4; D 3; Bus. Add.: 442 — 8th Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 21791; Res. Add.: 118 — 4th Street, Laudium, Pretoria; Phone: 79384. 6b) ISMAIL, Mohamed Hoosen: Busi- nessman; b. 1905, Durban. Edu.: Higher Grade School. Son of Hoosen Ismail. Broker and Agent, established in 1930. Agents for local and overseas firms. Trading’ under the name of M. H. Ismail (Pty.) Ltd. Bus. Add.: 86 Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 25850 and’ 27867; Res. Add.: 129 West Road, Overpert, Durban; Phone: 882860. Telegraphic Add.: Selfast-Dbn. 662 ISRAEL, Moses: Principal; b. 10th: December, 1918, Madini, Zululand. Educated: Seaview, Sastri College and _ Natal University. Son of Galla Gengiah Moses of Godavari District, Andra Pradesh, India. Quals: N.T.D.- Under Graduate. B.A. - Natal University. School Principal. At present attached to Melville S.A. School. Telegu Scholar. Writer of “Selected Christian Lyrics” in Telegu. Only South African born Indian to attempt such work. Well-known figure ~in Baptist circles. Activities: Treasurer: Natal Indian Baptist Delegate and Ex. Member: Stanger branch — N.I.B.A., Org. Sec.: Kearsney Indian Baptist Church. Co-Editors: “The Natal Indian Baptist: Association” — a historical publication. Sub-Editor: ‘“‘N.I.B.A. News” — a regular Religious news magazine. Editor: “Diary of the Kearsney Indian Baptist Church — 1949”. Read paper on “Introduction of Tea and the Indian immigrants into Natal” to a gathering of Indians and Europeans at Kearsney in 1960..Was a Com. Member: North Coast Republic Festival — (1966); Pres.: Shakaskraal and District Indian Schools Sports Con. — 1965; Secretary and Captain: Sputnik Tennis Club — Kearsney; Married: Parvithram Rangiah; S 2; D 4; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 10, Stanger; Phone: 21; Ext. 13. Res. Add.: 30 Acacia Road, Warrenton, Stanger.

---

## Page 7

134 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO BR IR IE BERK HABE HH BH HEB HEI HEH HE IK NEI HE IH HEI HEI HE IHL BK HEI HEI HEB HE BE HE IK HEI HEI HB BE HE BK BE BK BEB RL I HK BX AB HB HI BBO BE EO The Jadwat Family of Durban THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO THE JADWAT FAMILY Cont. 135 Ge] SESE RE REE IK HEME KEKE HK JADWAT, Hajee Ebrahim Maho- med: Director of Companies; b. 2nd = March, 1946, Durban. Manages main branch of the Group —Ideal’s of Grey Street. Managing Director of Jadwat Bros, and Ideal’s Group. Founder Member: Muslim Youth Movement, Durban. Res.: Essendene Road, Sydenham, Durban; Phone: 29487; 21873. HERR HAIN AEA HA HEINE SESE IEE HEE HEE REE HE HE EE HOEHOE HE HK HE HE BE HE BE EB A HE EH HE EE BE BEB BB HE ERE EE RE HE BH BM BK HB HEB BOE BH I BL HEH HEH HE HE EEK 663 JADWAT, Hajee Mohamed Ebra- him: Director of Companies; b. 11th July, 1917, Wakkerstroom, Transvaal. Origin: Kathor, District, Surat, India. One of leading Indian businessmen in Durban. Senior Member of well-known Ideal’s Group. Director: Jadwat Bros. (Pty.) Ltd.; Verulam Investments (Pty.) Ltd.; IMYL Investments (Pty.) Ltd.; Model Extension (Pty.)} Ltd.; Ideal Wholesalers (Pty.) Ltd., Ideal Mail Order House (Pty.) Ltd., Ideal’s (Pty.) Ltd. Patron and official of various Sports, Social, Cultural, Religious and Educational bodies; Add.: Essendene Road, Sydenham, Durban; Phone: 29487; 21873. Leg JADWAT, Goolam Hoosen Ya coob: Director of Companies; b. 24th May, 1948, Durban. Director of family Group of Companies. Manager: Ideai’s Boutique - Ladies’ Fashion Goods, Res. Add.: Essendéne Road, Sydenham, Durban; Phone: 29487. bey 66S JADWAT, Hajee Yacoob Ebrahim: Director of Companies; b. 23rd : ; JADWAT, Hajee Ahmed Ismail: March, 1919, Wakkerstroom, Tvl. Second of the Senior Members of the Ideal’sGroup. Director:various Companies under the control of Director of Companies; b. 29th December, 1937, Durvan. Director in the Jadwat Bros. and. Ideal’s Jadwat Bros. (Pty.) Ltd. Interested in all local activities; Add.: 555 South Coast Natal; Phone: 816150. Clairwood, GGL JADWAT, Mohamed (Faronk) Yacoob: Director of Companies. b. 29th December, 1937, Durban. Director in the Jadwat Bros. and Ideal’s Group. Handles the finances of the Group. Joined family business in 1963; Res. Address: Essendene Road, Sydenham, Durban; Phone: 29487. Group of Companies. Also Chairs man of Group. business Winchester Drive, Reservoir Hi’ Durban; Phone: Joined family Add. a Ss JADWAT, Goolam Mohamed Ismail: Director of Companies. b. 31st October, 1948, Durban, Director of Jadwat Bros, and Ideal’s Group. Manager: Ideal’s Extension, Clairwood, Durban. Res. Add.: Winchester Drive, Reservoir Hills, Durban. G10 JADWAT, Abdul Kader Mohamed: Director of Companies; b. 12th February, 1948, Durban. Director, Youngest of the Jadwat Bros. and Ideal’s Group Board of Directors. Manages the Bobat’s and BOTEX branch; Res, Add.: Essendene Rd., Sydenham, Durban; Phone: 66804; 316919.

---

## Page 8

an GT JADWAT, Mohamed Ahmed: Businessman. b. Sth January, 1900, Kathor, India. Educated: Isipingo, St. Aidans and Higher Grade. Son of Ahmed Jadwat, Kathor, District Surat, India. Business established, 1895. Jad- wat’s from 1905; M. A. Jadwat, 1913. First L.A.C. Chairman: 1966. Re-elected 1967/69 — Vice Chairman. Activities: Member: Isipingo Indian Society; Chairman: Isipingo Indian Society; Trustee: South C. Mosque and Madressa; Chairman: Isipingo Muslim League (Mosque and Madressa). Rep. S.A.L Congress 1941-1945 (India); Past Chairman: Isipingo Indian Ratepayers Assoc.; Toured Natal with A. L. Kajee re Indian question. Pretoria Agreement — rep. S.A.L.C. in India — Met most of Present and Past members of I.N.C. and M.L., including Liquat Ali Khan, Sastri, Rajagopachan, Nehru, Kunzru. Sports: Patron of various sports bodies over the years. Add.: Kajee Road, Isipingo Rail; Phone: 91527; P. O. Box 124, Isipingo Rail. Died: 1968. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 612 JADWAT, Ahmed Mohamed: ; Businessman; b. 9th January, 1923, Durban. Educated: Self- taught and Union College. Son of Mohamed Ismail Jadwat of Kathor, District Surat, India. Was previously with H. G. Paruk and -/A.M.M. Lockhat. Established own business — Jacol Wholesalers — 1954. Director: Jacol Wholesalers and Jacol Wholesalers Extension Q@eatrice Street). Specialists to the Hawker Trade. Keen on Cultural and Educational activities. Interes- ted in the activities. Interested in the activities of the Kathor Madressa Anjuman Islam and the Reservoir Hills Muslim Society; Married: Mariam E.G. Paruk of Durban; S 2; D 3. Bus. Add.: Albert Street, Durban; Phone: 27853; Res. Add.: 51 Elwak Road, Reservoir Hills, Durban. Ob eee nnn EET BREDA BE BI BB IE The Berogie Jaglal Family EERIE LIED BD 6174 JAGLAL, Berogie: (B. Jeglal): Farmer; b. 1905 at Rosenen Farm, Glencoe, Natal. Educated: Rosenen Farm, Glencoe Junior and Private Study. Son of Berogie Ramballie. Origin: Basti Jilla, U.P., India. Farmed in Glencoe area from early childhood. Moved to Cliffdale in 1935. Market Gardener for over thirty four. years. Interested in the Social, Religious and Cultural Activities of his community. Activities: Committee Member: Glencoe Govt. Aided Indian School; Vice President and Trustee: Cliffdale Indian Association; Member: Cliffdale Agricultural Association, Cliffdale Welfare Society; Committee Member: Glencoe Govt. Aided Indian School; Vice President, Committee Member and Trustee: Cliffdale Indian Association; Mem. : Cliffdale Welfare Society; Rec.: Religious studies; Married: Rimathee, daughter of R. Ramdath of Dingley Dale; S 3; D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 4015, Durban; Res..Cliffdale (Sterkspruit) Farm. 61% AL, Jaglal: b. 6th May, 1941 at Dundee. Edu.: aaa eave. Aided Indian School, Woodlands High and Springfield Training College ;Quals.: N.T.D., eae External (second year). Second son of Berogie Jaglal of Cliffdale. Joined teaching profession in 1962 — Mobeni Govt. Aided Indian School (Clairwood). Transferred to Cliffdale State Aided School, 1964. Activities: Committee Member: Cliffdale Indian Association; Secretary: Cliffdale Agricultural Association; Trustee: Ramsundat Charitable Trust. Interests: Sports: Soccer, Literature, Horticulture, Married: Romilla, daughter of A. Ramsundar of Cotton- lands, Verulam; S 2. 61S BHAGWATHIEPERSADH, Jaglal: Teacher; b. 7th July, 1934 at Glencoe, Natal. Educated: Isipingo State Aided Indian School, Baijoo-Maharaj (P. M. Burg); Woodlands High, Second year: N.T.D. Eldest son of Berogie Jaglal of Cliffdale. Joined teaching profession in 1956 — Cliffdale. Transferred — Madini (Zululand), Northdene Govt. Aided Indian School; Mayville School; Gilletts Govt. Aided Indian School; Cliffdale State Aided School, 1966. Cther Activities: Chairman: Cliffdale Hindu Dharam Sabha, Past Secretary and Member: Cliffdale Indian Association; Member: Cliffdale Agricultural Association; Member: Cliffdale Welfare Society. Interests: Sports: Tennis; Travel, Literature; Married: Sanjoni devi, daughter of R. Singh of Sherwood, Durban; S$ 2; D 1. RAJENDRAPERSADH, Jaglal: b. 24th August, 1959, Cliffdale, Natal. Educated: Cliffdale State Aided School. Third son of Berogie Jaglal of Cliffdale. Scholar. Interests: Gardening and General sports. THE SOUTHERN siete L_-[WOIAN WHO‘S WHO , 137 JAGATH,R.: Registrar and S.C.C. -b. 1938. Educated: Candella, Samaland, M. L. Sultan Technical College and External Quals.: N.D.C.; A.LA.C.; BEE CS; N,C.T.D. (Credits). Appointed to M. L. Sultan Technical College Staff as General Clerk in 1954, Served in this capacity until the end of 1958. Appointed Exam. Officer, 1959/61; Personnel Officer, 1962/65. Appointed to poe of College Registrar and ecretary to College Council in 1965. Attained high position at the age of twenty seven — a post considered to be the only one of its kind in the Republic and the highest graded post for Indians in the country’s Public Service. Is in sole charge of entire Administrative Division of the M. L. Sultan Technical College and its Auxillary Services. Secretary to College Council. Interests: Sports, Travel and Advanced Technical Education; Married: s 1; D 1. Add.: Centena Road, Durban, Natal; P. O. Box 1344; Phone: 68991. £717 _JAJBHAY, Hoosen Ahmed: b. 10th September, 1906, Dundee, Natal. Educated: Johannesburg Govt. Indian School. One of the finest Tennis Players amongst non- Whites to appear on S.A. courts for over a decade, Began playing career in 1932. Open Singles Champion at Bantu Mens’ Centre, Johannesburg, and within four years, annexed twenty eight Championships in this country - League and Provincial, Singles and Doubles. Was South African Champion, Coloured, Indian and Bantu Associa- tions. Captained Transvaal on numerous occasions. No other player in South African non-White Tennis remotely approaches this remarkable feat and the record should stand for many years to come. He also served Transvaal Tennis in an administrative capacity for many years. Now resides in London’s Wimbledon area. 617% JALAL, Mahomed, Salleh: Cus- toms Agent. b. 21st March, 1921, Tol-Kolaba-Koken, India. Edu.: St. Oswald Indian School, New- castle. Son of Mohamed Ally Jalal. Origin: TolKolaba-Koken, India. Arrived in the Republic of S.A. in 1929. After schooling joined family business in Newcastle. Began farming at Umkomaas in 1942. In 1944, established Butchery at Germiston, Transvaal. Returned to Durban in 1950 and became a freelance operator in the travel agency, customs clearance and forwarding business and also a commercial traveller. Travel: Republic of South Africa, Swaziland, Rhodesia and the Portuguese territories. Activities: Past Captain: Kismet Cricket Club, Newcastle; Captain: Stella Football Club, Newcastle; Very keen member of debating team; Member: Young Men Muslim Association, Newcastle; Member: County Cricket Club, Durban; Founder Member and Executive Member: Isipingo Beach Muslim Association; Founder Member: Isipingo’ Beach Civic Association; Executive: Isipingo Beach Sports Grounds Association; Vice Chairman: f. B. Education Committee; Co-organiser: I. B. Blood Bank; Sports: Cricket, Football, Social Welfare; Married: Amina Bibi Goolam Sahib Patel;S 4; D 3. Bus. and Res. Add.: 2 Beaumont Road, Isipingo Beach; Phone: 91377. 6 JALALPOR, Mohamed Suliman: b. 13th April, 1918, Pretoria, Tvl. Educated: Pretoria North-Muslim Hostel. Son of Suleman Eb. Jalal- por. Son of early Northern Tvl. Pioneer (1905). Entered business scene 1935, — S. E. Jalalpor — (1930). Takes a keen interest. in all local activities. Travel: Pakistan, M.E., E.A., P.E.A. and Swaziland. Activities: Trustee: Laudium Mus- lim Trust; Member: Pretoria Indian Traders Association; L/Member: C.LT., Johannesburg; Transvaal Parchola Muslim Association. Rec.: Angling and Travel; Married: Amina, daughter of Hassan Ebrahim of Pretoria;S 3; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 8, Broederstroom, Transvaal; Phone: 8. Res. Add.: Broederstroom; Phone: 8. G80 JAMALOODEEN, Ahmed: b. 1884, Ramgur, Rajputana, India. Eldest son of Ahmed [mambacus. Arrived in South Africa in 1894 and settled in Durban, Educated: Durban. Joined building trade at an early age. One of the best known building contractors in Natal over the last sixty years. Built some of the finest Indian homes and business houses as well as Mosques and Madressas in the province. The famous Mosque at Ladysmith stands as a monument to the genius of the Jamaloddeen family in the building trade. Moved to Dannhauser in 1912 and employed as a builder at the Cambrian Mines. Also known for his string of butcheries and the building materials trade in the North. Other activities: Trustee: Dundee Mosque and Madressa Trust and first Chairman of the Dannhauser Indian School Board. He presided at the welcome of Mrs. Sarojini Naidoo at Dannhauser and was host to the Grand Old Lady during her short stay. One of the most colourful personalities in this province. 6g ! JANKI, Boodram: b. 1879, Gazipur, U.P., India. Edu.: In the Vernacular. Son of Janki, of Gazipur. Initially saw service as Manservant to the Addison family which was connected closely with the Gledhow Mill, Stanger. Over this period of service purchased 100 acre farm in Sans Souci which remains to this day the property of the Boodram family. Became Farmer and Businessman after termination of service with Addisons. Was hero in near- drowning tragedy when he saved the life of one of the Addison girls. Well liked personality. Supported many needy causes. A friend of the African and known by all as “Tandabantu”. Hobbies: Fishing; Married: Subhagia Gobandar of Tongaat; S 5;D 2; Add.: Groutville.

---

## Page 9

138 ¥ SO HERE 6s THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO of Isipingo $2 SERS OR IIE IEE RBBB BET BI IB TE B BE DED IIIB BBE BD BBB BBB I SI BB BEBE I There is a strange twist to the events that led to the arrival of M.K. Jamadar, or to give his right name Mehboub Khan in 1884. Mehboub Khan’s nephew, Abdulla Khan had long preceded him to South Africa and during his voyage to this country, he was badly injured by the anchor chain of the ship which was bringing him to this country and for six months he suffered under the difficult early hospitalisation which was primitive to the extreme in this country. Abdulla’s father in India, worried by the way things were going, decided to send someone to South Africa to bring back his son and the man chosen was Mehboub Khan more so because of his adventurous nature. On his arrival in South Africa, he found Abdulla well and Mehboub Khen returned to India without him. Abdulla remained as Bookkeeper to the Paruks in Durban. After his short stay here Mehboub Khan decided to settle in South Africa. He was in the employ of the Gaekwar State Police. His Jamadar title was equivalent to a Captain’s rank and having resigned his post he set out for South Africa in 1884. By the ninety’s he had already opened a trading store at Adams Mission and by 1905 he was owner of two other flourishing businesses — at the Isipingo Temple and at the entrance of the Reunion Sugar Estates. The Reunion shop was opened in 1918. He married in India and at the birth of his first son, Ebrahim Ali in India, *& Son’ was added to the M. K. Jamadar name in 1905, The present modern premises were only built in 1958 and include a wholesale and retail section. Mehboub Khan was highly educated in both Arabic and Urdu. His knowledge of Islamic subjects made him a worthy adversary where Alims were concerned. Public spirited, he was a respected member of the local Muslim and other communities. He was born in Kathor, India, 1855. His death in 1953 at the age of ninety seven was an irreparable loss to the community. He jeft behind three sons and a daughter. Essop Khan is the eldest of the sons, in South Africa followed by Shaukat Ali. Ebrahim Ali, the eldest resides in India. The present mosque which bears his name — Mehboubia — was built to perpetuate his memory by his two sons, Essop Ali and Shaukat Ali in 1954, Ce SE EI ERO HERERO BBD EI BED DD The M.K. Jamadar Family x Fd x : % Fd Fd x mm THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO BRIE IK HE HEHE RENEE ILIA I EE The Ragunundan Jankeepersadhs of Verulam SIE EI HEI LIE HE HOE BH 3 HEH HEB HE HK HOE HE BAK HE HK REA HH HE HK BOE HL HE HHL HHL IR HOEHE EH HE BI HOE HE IE HEH HHH HOE HH I HE HL HE HE HH HH BK The first of the family to arrive in South Africa was Manjee Gopal, grandfather of Jankeepersadh who landed in Natal in 1874. He began farming immediately in the Cottonlands area on a fifteen acre plot. He was born in Rawoyi, Upper Bihar, India in 1835. He came of a family of farmers and landowners. Ragunundan, father of Jankeepersadh, worked his holding for many years and after his death, the land reverted to his son who still farms 139 ES-$-$-$.$-$-$-£-2-$-¢-2°¢-2. 5.3 ESSOP ALI: b. February, 1906. Educated: Higher Grade School. Joined father in business in 1925. Now runs M. K. Jamadar & Sons — Retail organisation at Reunion. Takes a keen interest in all matters affecting community in Durban and District. Trustee: Mehboubia Mosque — Reunion; Member: Educational Committee — Reunion Indian School. EBRAHIM ALI: (Retired); Resident in Kathor, India. SHAUKAT Jamadar: Businessman; b. 17th June, 1920. Educated: Isipingo, Carlisle Street and Molen’s University. Joined family business in 1940. Now runs Wholesale division — M. K. Jamadar & Sons. Active in all local affairs. Ekcted to Local Affairs Committee — 1966/67. Treasurer: Isipingo Ratepayers Association; Isipingo Moslem League; Committee Member: Educational Committee — Reunion Indian State Aided School. Sikandar, the eldest is in the family business as Wholesale Manager. there. RAGUNUNDAN, Jankeepersadh: Farmer and Business- nessman. b. 7th November, 1922 at Cottonlands, Verulam. Educated: Umdhloti Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Ragunundan Manjee and grandshon of Manjee Gopal of -Rawoyi, Upper Bihar, India. Farming in the Redcliffe and Sans Souci area of the North Coast. Owner of the Verulam Garage and Service Station and Operator of Jankeepersadh ‘Transport. Activities: Chairman: Social Club — Canelands and Darnell Indian Mill Group. Supports various deserving causes in Verulam and District. Donated jointly — Ragunundan Bros. Classroom to Shree Gopalall indian School Verulam; Married: Shurwadha Dhevi S, Brijnath; § 1; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 168, Verulam; Phone: 189. Res, Add.: Redcliffe, Verulam, Natal. 638 SURESH, Jankeepersadh: b. 26th October, 1953 at Durban. Scholar at Umdhloti Govt. Aided School and Verulam High School. Only son. Keen Soccerite. Interested in all forms of technical study. Rec.: Angling and Photography. 6&6 MRS. R. Jankeepersadh: Housewife; b. 27th November, 1931 at Sydenham, Durban, Educated: S.R.S. and Malvern Indian School. Daughter of S. Brijnath of Clare Estate, Durban. Interested in Social and Religious activities. Is a keen needlewoman and avid reader. Rec.: Gardening and Flower-arrangement. 687 NILA DEVI: b. 19th August, 1950 at Durban. Eldest daughter. Scholar at Verulam High School and Umdhloti Govt. Aided School. Interests: Needlework, Literature, Music. [s at present doing Commerce externally and attends sewing classes. £34 INDIRA, Jankeepersadh: b. 23rd April, 1957 at Durban. Scholar: Madho Singh Memorial Indian School. Keen at knitting; fond of games — Tenniquoit. Rec.: Books, Music, Gardening Form four student.

---

## Page 10

140 HR KEKE HK HK IIE KE RRR Gao Jeeawon, the pioneer of the family arrived in this country in the year 1875 on the S. S. Eumore. He was ; ; born in Buskec, U.P. in the year 1860 and emigrated to this at f et country with a large number of 7 le people who came from the same ae area. He worked for the Akitts ‘ and later settled in the Frasers area where he had bought a farm of some twenty acres in 1898, In 1919, the family moved to Fair- ‘ ‘preeze which made it casier for the family to be nearer the Fairbreeze Schoo! which was then known as the Wesleyan Mission School. Ajudha was educated at Another Wesleyan School which was established at Veru- lam. The Jeawon family was to play a great part in the history of our people in the educational field. Ajudha was 643 ANNIROODH, Jeeawon: Student, Final Year ~ Dentistry. b. March, 1946. Educated: Fairbreeze, —-_ y College, India. The Jeeawon Family of Fairbreeze IME BK BR BE HE HE BOEHE HEHE RE HE HOE HK BE HE BE HE BE 3 BB BL HE BE HOE IKE BOEHEB BH BH BH HEE EH HE HE I HEHE BA HOE HB BB HH BK LE HE REI HEE Sastri, Salisbury and Govt. Dental THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO x x EJ % x F.3 x x x Fd x one of the earliest teachers of the English language. He He became a principal of his school at the age of sixteen. He served under M. K. Gandhi as one of the group leaders in the Ambulance Corps during the Boer War at Colenso and Ladysmith. He was awarded the Queen’s Medal for outstanding war services. As Chairman of the Vishwaroop Temple, Trustee of Ghokole Hall and Member of the Natal Indian Teachers Society, it is clear that the community held in high esteem. Other Activities: Patron — Fairbreeze School Sporting Club and Merebank Hindi School. Chairman: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association. {t was due to his untiring efforts that the Fairbreeze Hindi Sabha Hall was erected. It was here that he also gave of his time to further vernacular education during his retirement from 1936 to 1954, the year of his death. He was associat- ed with that other well-known figure, Shehaduth Naby, in teaching vernacular languages beside English long after they had left full-time teaching. He was interested in and spoke a number of Indian dialects. He toured India in 1951. 92. DUKANTHY, Jeeawon: Principal; b. 31st March, 1910 at Frasers, Educated: Wesleyan and Fairbreeze Schools, Eldest son of Ajudha Jeeawon, Principal: William Camp- bell School (Cornobia) at Mt. Edgecombe. Joined teaching profession, 1926. Acting Principal: Maidstone, 1951. Taught at various schools, Other Activities: President: Fairbreeze Sporting Club; Secretarv: I.C.W.S., Fairbreeze, Married: Leelawathy Dowley; S 1; D 3. Add.: “Benares House”’, Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Natal. 64% PRATHIMA, Jeeawon: daughter of Dukanthy Jeeawon. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA ne WHO'S WHO 14] JEEBODH, Basdewo: Business- man. b, 28th February, 1928 at Greytown, Natal. Edu.: Estcourt Govt. Indian School. Son of J. Dasruth of Estcourt. One of leading Fruiterers in the Dundee District, Midlands Fruiterers, established in 1950.Well-knownin business circles and sportsman. Keen Social and Religious Worker. Rep. Weenen County, 1946/49, as player and administrator. Was a Member of Stars C.C., Estcourt (1945/48). Rep. Weenen Country, Tennis — 1946/50. Captained: Dundee T.C., sixteen years. Also takes interest in sports administration; Married: 7 children. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 172; Phone: 350, Dundee; Res. Add.: 30 Oldacre Strect, Phone: 350. 697 JASSAT, Abdullahak Mohamed: Director of Companies; b. 27th April, 1915, Bethal, Transvaal. Educated: Kholvad, District Surat, India. Son of Mahomed E. Jassat. Estab. own business — 1930. Joined Saley’s Agency, 1949. Has travelled extensively — M.E., India, Pakistan, U.K., Europe, U.S., African Territories. Interested in all public and other activities; Rec.: Tennis and Bowls; Married; Bus. Add. : 27 Becker Street, Ferrierastown, Johannesburg; Phone: 8384627; Res. Add.: 11—16th Street, Vrededorp — Johannesburg; Phone: 365881. G JEEBODH, Harriam: Manufacturer; b. 6th December, 1922, Greytown, Natal. Educated: Estcourt, Natal. Son of J. Dasruth. One of younger set of Indian Industrialists in Estcourt. Was Director and Manager of leading Mineral Water Factory — Goldfields. Other Activities: Hon. L.V.P.: Estcourt Tennis Club; Estcourt Indian F.A., Hon. Treas.: Weenen County Indian F.A. (1944-51). Treasurer: Hindu Youth Centre; Member: Estcourt Indian Ratepayers Association; Finance Committee: Estcourt M. L. S. School. Was a Member of various organisations over the years. Sports: Tennis. Was active Soccerite and Cricketer, Married: Four children; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 5, Estcourt, Phone: 294; Res. Add.: 6 Shepstone Avenue, Estcourt, Phone: 294, Estcourt, Natal. 700 JHAGROO, Ajodhia, Prasad: Teacher; b. 19th January, 1917, at Seven Oaks, Natal. Educated: Greytown Primary Govt. Indian School. (Std. VI; T4 and Natal Teachers Senior Certificate). Son of §. Jhagroo. Joined teaching profession, 1935 Harden Heights. Was transferred to Baijoo- Maharaj, 1947.'Has taken an active part in almost every Social, Cul- tural and Sports organisations. Was one of those instrumental im the foundation of the F.O.S.A. — Raisethorpe branch (1949). Acts.: Past Trustee: Recreation Club, Raisethorpe; Young Natalians Past Vice President, Cricket and Football Club. Ex. Treasurer: Goodwill Club, Raisethorpe; Vice President and F/Member: Ratepayers Association, Raisethorpe. Vice President and Ex. Secretary: Raisethorpe Arya Samaj. Council Member: Social services of South Africa, P. M. Burg Branch; Rec.: Fishing and Tennis; Married: Akash Budree; S 2; D 7; Res. Add.: 550 Greytown Road, Retail Manager; b. 29th August, 1937, Pretoria, Transvaal. Edu.: Pretoria Primary and Pretoria he Ins. Agent. Also manages Retail — org. — Alex Super Market, Pretoria. Activities: President: Pretoria and District F.A.; Vice President: N.T.C, Union; Chairman: Iqbals United F.C.; Rec.: Cricket and Soccer; Married: § 1; D 2; Pus. Add.: P.O, Box 18217, Hercules, Pretoria; Phone: 772931; Res. Add.: 274-19th Street, November, 1938 at Durban. Edu.: St. Anthony’s School, Greyville and M. L. Sultan Technical Jhavery & Sons ~— 1962. Joint Director of parent company. .One of leading shoe retailers in Durban. Pakistan, M.E. and Haj in 1954. Rece.: Badminton, Table Tennis, Cricket. Married: Zamila, daughter of LateO. H. Mohamed Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. High. Son of Mohamed Ismail Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. College. Son of Adam _ S. Activities: Member: M. L. Sultan of Pretoria. D 1; Bus. Add.: 378 Pine Street, Durban. Bus. 69G f.. = Jhamaney. One of younger set of 698 Jhavery. Origin: Porbandar, India. Technical College, Badminton and Res. Phone No.: 24235. JHAMANEY, Yacob, Ismail: : sports administrators. Well-known JHAVERY, Adam Yunus: b. 3rd Joined family business S. M. Club. Travel: India, Ceylon, i Gord JHAVERY, Goolam, Mahomed, Suleman: Businessman. b. 16th February, {937 at Durban, Natal. Educated: St. Anthonys and M. L. Sultan Technical College. Third son of S. Jhavery. Origin: Porban- dar, Saurastra, India. Joined family business, 1954 — S. M. Jhavery & Sons — Footwear Specialists. Director: Jhavery’s Job Bazaar, Jhavery’s Investments (Pty.) Ltd. Haj: 1958 and 67. Travel: Europe, U.K., M.E., India, Pakistan, Rhodesia, P.E.A. and E.A. Acts.: Vice Chairman: Isipingo Beach Muslim Association; Trustee: Mobeni Heights Muslim Association; Orient Islamic Trust; Fathima and Suleman Jhavery Charitable Trust. Rec.: Cricket, Tennis and Swimming; Married: Mehroon-nesa, daughter of A.S.M. Jhavery; D4. Bus, Add.: 474 West Street, Durban; Phone: 60706; Res. Add.:Flat 4,8 - 3rd Avenue, Isipingo Beach —Phone:91 203.

---

## Page 11

142 YOu JINA, Chaganlal Ganda: Businessman; b. Ist February, 1914, Dahbel, India. Educated: Dahbel School; Johannes- burg Govt. School. Son of Ganda Jina. Established bus. in 1932 ~ C. Ganda Merchant Tailors. Opened new branch — Style Tailors & Outfitters, 1969. Interested in all local activities. Arrived in South Africa in 1927. Travel: India, Fast Africa. Married: Wajiaben, daughter of Nagar Visram; S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: 5 Pioneer Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg; Phone: 8342828; Res. Add.: 5 Pioneer Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Transvaal. 703 JOGEE, Narandas: Businessman. b. 1913, Umbhrat, Dist. Navsari, India. Educated: Umbhrat and Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Jogee Daya. Joined. father in business in 1932 at Pyramid. Is now Sole Proprietor, trading as J. Daya & Sons. Second son of Jogee Daya. Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 43, Bon Accord, Transvaal; Phone: 59264. Res. Add.: Pyramid, Transvaal. 70S JHETAM, Ali Mia: Businessman: b. 22nd September, 1907, Vahoor, India. Educated: Higher Grade, Marine College.and Poona, India. Son of Mohamed Ameen Jhetam. Grand son of Mohamed Cassim, one of earliest pioneers amongst Indian traders in Natal. The firm was established in the eighty’s and later with the arrival of Abdul Kadir, brother of Mohamed Cassim, the firm of M. C. Camroodeen branched out into the Wholesale trade in the early ninety’s in Johannesburg and Durban, one of the largest of its kind in this country. Well-known throughout South Africa. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Activities: Past Trustee: Jumma Musjid, Durban. Rec.: Urdu Literature. Bus. Add.: 135 Grey Street, Durban. Phone: 22437; Res. Add.: 135 Grey Street, Durban. TOG JOHN, Clifford, Robert: N.T.D. b. 25th August, 1958, P. M. Burg, Natal. Educated: St. Pauls and Woodlands; Springfield Training College. Son of John Appiah. Career: Began teaching in 1952 — Sutherlands. State Aided School. Transferred to E.P.S., 1961; Marian State Aided School, 1962; St. Pauls, 1968 as Senior Assistant, Other Activities: Past Secretary: Stella C.C.; Sportsmaster at all above schools. Also St. Pauls. Del.: P.M. Burg Schools (Primary) Association; Past President: P. M. Burg Primary Schools Sports Association. Interested in all activities. Member: New Home Ratepayers Association; Cricket: Joined Senior ranks, 1947. (M.I.C.C.) S.T.C.; Played school Cricket: Woodlands and Sastri College ; Stella C.C. Rep. P. M. Burg “B” and “A”’; Period — 1960/ 64. Also represented P. M. Burg Teachers XI and Natal High Schools, 1951/52. Captained both clubs. Sports: Cricket: Royals C.C.; Rec.: Angling, Tennis, Dancing; Married: Evelyn, daughter of M. Juan of P. M. Burg; S 4;D 1. Bus. Add.: St. Pauls State Aided School, P. M. Burg; Phone: 41769; Res. Add.: 37 Berea Crescent, New Holme, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. x IE EK BK AIK AK EK Shortly after the Boer War, Brijlal Jogee landed in Cape Town and after a few years in Johannesburg he moved to Pretoria where he established a retail business in 1933. He seemed to have led a colourful life. He served as a miner in the gold fields — the Crown Mines — opened a cafe in President Street and was for some time a Hawker in the Pretoria area. In between the years, he made several trips to India and also visited the East African countries. He was born in Samapur, District Navsari, India. He died in 1940. 10% VALLA3HB. Jogee: b. Pretoria, Educated: Pretoria Govt. School and Johannesburg Primary (Gold St.). Second son of Brijlal Jogee of Samapur, India and Pretoria. Occupation: Motor Mechanic; Married: Ambaben, daughter of Mrs. and the Late Vassant Kessa of Letaba, Northern Transvaal. EIR HES PR BEH I BEI HE ILI BR HEI HE SIE BME BB HB BHI ENB HEB BB HBB HB I BB I BB BB BB I BBS BB 9 BB I BH I I IIE The Brijlal Jogee Family of Pretoria SEI EBLE HEH BI BES BHI SH HHH SH BH HH BBE HH BH BDI BHI BH BI BABA BB BSB BBB BH OBB BB oI SEIKI HEHEHE RIK IK AK XE 701 RAMIJEE, Brijlal Jogee: Represen- tative; b. 16th August, 1936 at Pretoria, Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School and Jhb. High School. Son of Brijlal Jogee. Activities: . Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Rec.: Cricket and Travel; Married: Bhaniben, daughter of Parshotam Lalla- of Johannesburg; Bus. Add.: Tigers- poort Trading, Bronkerspruit, P.O. Box 11203, Lynwood; Phone: 87401; Res. Add.: Tigerspoort, Pronkerspurit; Phone: 87401. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 143 eR Eis wt SESE EE PIA NEVE MA DRS SRE Nera Pe IY OR He ET x x : : 3 : The Jogee Family : x x x e x z of Pretoria 3 x MNO x HE IEE IE NE REI IH HE HE HE IH IL IE HO HEH SEE IH HH HE BE BBE HH HK HEE BE BH HEHE HEB IH BH HE NE HR BU BA BBE HEB BAH BEB BK BA BBE HE HB BK BH HEE HE IK IK BE HE HH The pioneering member of the family, Jogee Daya, arrived in this country in 1902 and settled in Pretoria. He was born in Umbhrat, District Navsari, India in 18.78. After a few years in the fruit and vegetable trade, he opened his first business as a general dealer at Pyramid, not far from Pretoria. The firm was then known as Jogee Daya & Sons. The second son Jogee Daya, Narandas, joined the parent firm in 1923. He had just arrived in the country and still runs the family concern which was established in 1919, He was born in Umbhrat, Navsari, India in 1913. —W{ JAWAHARLAL, Narandas Jogee: Businessman; b. ist February, 1935 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School and Pretoria North Indian School. Son of Narandas Jogee; Origin: Umbhrat, India. Established petroleum oil distribution business in 1964. Supplies, local ‘traders in the Pretoria and District area. Interests: Travel: India, 1954; East Africa and P.E.A. Activities: Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Rec.: Travel. Married: Manibeh, daughter of Naran Kanjee of Germiston; S 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 1086, Pretoria; Phone: 26721; Res. Add.: Laudium, Pretoria; Phone: 59264. alee NAYANKUMAR, J. Jogee: b. 7th December, 1961 at Pretoria. Eldest son of J, Narandas. Student: Pretoria Boys Junior School. Interests: Sports. N23 MANIBEN, Jogee Narandas: Wife of Jawaharlal Narandas Jogee. b. Germiston (Edenvale). Daughter of Naran Kanjee of Germiston. Housewife. Interests: Sewing and Embroidery. TY KISHAN, Jawaharlal Narandas Jogee: b. 13th July, 1969 at Pretoria, Transvaal. Third son of J. Narandas. MANOS, Jawak .tal Narandas Jogee: b. 2nd July, 1965, Pretoria, Transvaal, Second son of J. Narandas.

---

## Page 12

144 : The Hira Jogee Family BERR ERE HERE EH EE ERD EI HE BARRE HK IK HEI BK KE HR BK HEIKKI, “US THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO of Pyramid The eldest of the sons of Jogee Daya or Lala Vala, arrived in this country in 1917 at the age of fifteen. He was born in Umbhrat, Navsari, India in 1902. Educated in Umbhrat and Johannesburg Government Indian School he joined the family concern of Daya Jogee and Sons at Pyramid in 1928. In 1939 he opened his own business — Hira Jogee — at Pyramid, not far from the parent firm. Public spirited, he was a member of Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj and was a supporter of a number of deserving causes in the area. He was also instrumental in establishing a temple in the home village of Umbhrat in India in the late thirty’s. He visited India several times between the years 1928 and 1961. He died on 13th August, 1969 at the age of sixty seven. “UG x % x: R x x JAMNADAS, Hira: Hawker; b. 2nd December, 1930 at Pyramid, Northern Transvaal. Educated: Pretoria High School. Second son of Hira Jogee & Sons of Pyramid. Hawker — Jamnadas Hira (1960). Activities: Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj. Keen — Motor- ing Mechanic. Travel: Toured U.K., Europe, Mediterranean countries, India, East Africa, 1967. Married: Shanti, daughter of Bhana Daya of Johannesburg, Transvaal;D 2;Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 35, Pyramid. Res. Add.: Pyramid. Phone: 59424. “WY AMRIT, Hira: Businessman; b. 7th August, 1939, Pyramid, N. ~ ..ovaal, Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Third son of Hira Jogee of Pyramid. Business- man: Trading as Amrit Hira, Brits. General Dealer, Interested in all public activities. Rec.: Soccer; Married: Lilawathie, daughter of GosaiJ. of De Aar, Cape Province. D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 221, Brits; Res. Add.: Brits, Indian area. Phone: 317, Brits. 59424; Res. Add Ue HIMAT, Hira: Businessman. b. 11th July, 1941, Pyramid, N. Tvl. Educated: Pretoria High School. © Fourth son-.of Jogee of Pyramid. Businessman: Trading as Bhovana Stores — Generai Dealers, Interests: All sports. Keen on all local activities. Married: Meera, daughter of D. Morar of Johannes- burg: D t. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 221, Brits; Res. Add.: Brits, Indian area. Phone: 730. | a 20 CHOTOO, Hira: Hawker; b. 15th February, 1929, Umbhrat, Nav- sari, India. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Son of Hira Jogee. First joined family concern — Hira Jogee — 1947. Sole Managing Director. Interests: Literature and Travel: Visited India — 1938/40. Activities: Member: Pretoria ‘Hin- du Seva Samaj; Rec.: Soccer and Tennis; Married: Luxmiben- daughter of Mr. & Mrs. Dajee J. of Ventersdorp;;S 2; D 1. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 35, Pyramid; Phone: .: Pyramid, Northern Transvaal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 145 x SEIESK SK IK I HE HEE ENE The first of this branch of the Joosubs of Pretoria arrived in this country in 1873 and was one of the early merchant pioneers in South Africa. After some years in Durban where he opened a business, he moved to Johannesburg and eventually to Pretoria. [t- was here that he built up one of the leading wholesale business in the Transvaal with interests extending into the property market and land. Deeply religious, he took a keen interest in all communal activities and played a leading part in the educational advancement of his people. In the establishment of the Pretoria Mohammedan Islamic School, he was one of the leading donors the school still bears his name in acknowledgement of his magnanimous gift of R10,000 towards its construction. He was a trustee of the Pretoria Mohammedan Mosque and Madressa. Born in Ranavav, India in 1865, he died in 1944 at the age of seventy nine. He was survived by his widow, five sons and four daughters. The third son of Hajec Mohammed Joosub was Hajee Joosub who was born on the 21st January, 1907, Pre- toria, Transvaal. He was ‘educated at Pretoria in his formative years and after some years with xfer 7 SIKANDAR, Hajee Joosub: Businessman; b. 24th July, 1932 at Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Boys High School and Park View Moslem Hostel. Son of Hajee Joosub Hajee Mohamed. Origin: Ranavav, India. Head of one leading Commercial and Industrial organisations. Director of several leading companies inthe Republic. Widely travelled ~ Japan and the Far East, Europe, U.K., U.S., Canada and the African countries. Activities: President: The Pretoria Quranic Committees; The Pretoria Islamic Child Welfare and Research Committee the Universal Truth Movement. Rec.: Tennis and other outdoor sports; Married: Feroza, S$ 2; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 10464, Johannesburg; Phone: 8386185; Res, Add.: 232-5rd Ave., Laudium. The Hajee Joosub Family of Pretoria BE EIA HK HE A BO BK REIL HE HA HB HK BK BOEBK BKB BK HE HE BH HE BH HK HE BH BEI HA HE HEI HK HEHE BA HEE I HEH BH HEHE HH HEE IE BEB HEI HE EI HE HEE EK x E4 Ag eg 2 $65.52. 2.5.5.4 Union College in Johannesburg, he completed his educa- tion at Aligarh University in India. On his return to this country he joined the family concern of M. H. Joosub and Sons and it was not long before he was the Managing Director of the firm. The other partners in the business were Omar Hajee Mohamed and Hajee Ebrahim Mohamed. He took a leading part in all matters affecting the Indian community. He was a Committee member of the T.LC. (Pretoria Branch) and served Vice President on the Pretoria Indian Hospital Committee. He was also a Treasurer of the Pretoria Young Men’s Muslim Association and a Vice President of the Pretoria District Indian Football Association. In 1936, he made his first Pilgrimage to Mecca. It was the first Air-Pilgrimage by a South African Indian Moslem. Widely travelled, he visited most of the countries of the world, including the U.S., Canada, U.K., Europe, the Middle East and the African countries. He died at the age of fifty six in 1963. Survived by his widow, two sons and four daughters, Hajee Joosub served his people well and extended the family interests in trade to the vast enterprise it is today. 123 SOLLY, Hajee Joosub: Director of Companies; b. 7th March, 1939 at Pretoria, Educated: Pretoria Indian Boys High School Son of Hajee Joosub Hajee Mohamed. Travel: U.K., Europe, U.S., Middle East, Zambia and Rhodesia, East Africa, P.E.A. Joined firm, 1957. Director: J. & E. Wholesale Distributors. Social, Religious and Cultural. Holds interests in various undertakings in chain stores, travel agency and other ventures. Acf __ Treasurer: Pretoria Indian C.W.S.; Member: Lauditt-fosyue Com- mittee, Taj Mahal Club. Rec.: Tennis. Bus? Add: P. O. Box 2184, Pretoria. Phone: 23764. Res.: 274-5th Avenue, Laudium. Phone: 795949.

---

## Page 13

146 124 JOHN, M.: Sports Administrator; b. 27th January, 1897, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School and External. One of outstanding men in Public affairs, parti- cularly Sports. He was connected with Durban and Natal Soccer for close on to fifty five years. Activities: H.L.V-P.; D.I.F.A.; H.L.V.P.; President, Past Secretary and Trea- surer: N.ILF.A.; Past Secretary and President: S.A.I.F.A.; L/Trustee, Chairman: Finance Committee D. I. Sports Grounds Association; L/Trustee, Chairman: D.I.F.A. Trust. Past Secretary, Treasurer and Pres.: D.D.I.C.U.; First Secretary and Treasurer: N.I.C.U.; Founder Mem.: H.L.V.P., Secretary and Chairman: N. I, Refrees’ Asso.; Patron: S.A.L. Refrees’ Association; Founder Member: S. A. Soccer Federation and the Indian Ex-Servicemens’ Club, As Secretary of the S.A.I.F.A.; he was one of those largely responsible for the All-India Tour in 1934. Add.: 165 Villa Road, Sydenham, Durban, Natal. 2S JUMNA, Dawchand: Principal; b. 8th November, 1918. Educated: Verulam Indian Primary School and Sastri College. Qualifications: B.A. (N.U.C. Part-time: 1942); U.E.D.: (1947);B. Comm.: (1949) Natal University. Son of Juma Shah of Khelilabad, U.P., India. Took up teaching in 1938. Principal of Wyld Memorial Verulam in 1950. Principal of Shree Gopallal, Wasbank, Emona, Natest and -Jhugroo S. A., Ottawa. Other Activities: Past Chairman: Verulam Branch ~— Natal Indian Teachers Association (1956); Past Secretary: Durban Indian Schools Football THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Association — “945/48. Hon. Auditor: Verulam Clinic Board; Verulam Indian Grounds Association; Verulam Deepavali Union; Verulam Shree Subramanior Temple, Verulam Jhugroo Indian School Trust; Married: Katherine, daughter of Late Mr. Daniel Peters; S$ 1;D 2. Add.: Garden Street, Grangetown, Verulam; Phone: 162 — P. O. Box 121, Verulam, Natal. 24 JOOMA, Cassim Ally: Business- man. b. 1917, Middleburg, Tvl. Educated: Middleburg and Punchkani, India. Son of Ally Eb. Jooma. First entered business scene — E, Jooma & Sons (Pty.) Ltd., General Merchants. Promin- ently personality. Leading Sports- man and Administrator during early days. Now leads retired life. Met General Nagib (Egypt) during 1964 “Middle East tour. Travel: India, Pakistan, M.E., E.A., P.E.A., Zambia, Rhodesia and Malawi. Activities: Past President: Middle- burg Muslim Jamaat, Middleburg Indian Committee: Past Chairman: N.LC. — Middleburg Branch. Was appointed Commissioner of Oaths Middleburg District. . ook part in Indian political movements until 1958. Rec.: Soccer - Cricket. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 55, Middleburg, Tvl. ¢ Deere tat eta Pema ane eam } em enh i PARI ORE PE POMEL PRI Oa I, FN + > > > >A PAE PA 5 aA. > {> A 9 ET) PN PA DOERR PADS, PRO RD} D-DD > 1 >, GD GES > CE EID THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN “WHO'S WHO” is read by everyone because they find it informative and an interesting publication SP NT 1 GD IT A P| THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 147 27] KADOO, Suleman Moosa: Sales- man. b. 28th February, 1918, Richmond, Natal. Educated: Richmond Govt. Aided Indian School, Eldest son of Moosa Kadoo, One of outstanding Sports- men produced by this Midlands town. Soccer: Junior and Senior ranks — 1932 ~ Yanks F.C., Joined Young Cols., 1944. Was also Member of unbeaten P. M. Burg Muslims. Rep. Jnv., Junior and Senior Divisions — 1932/52; P. M. Burg I.F.A., Sam China 1945/51, Johannesburg; East London (1947); Durban (1949); Port Elizabeth (1951). Inter-race fixtures — Coloureds and Africans and All Indian Cricket: Orientals C.C., (P. M. Burg) — 1934/51. Rep. P. M. Burg’ — Inter-District. Captained “‘B” — P. M. Burg. Useful Bat; Slow R/A Spinner and W/keeper. Other Activities: Treasurer: Richmond Sports Club; Member: Richmond Indian Ratepayers Association; P. M. Burg Muslim Service League; Rec.: Soccer; Member: Richmond C.C.; Married: Hafeza, daughter of Suleman Cassim of Mid-Illovo; S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 691, P. M. Burg; Phone: 25317; Res, Add.: Harding Street, Rich- mond, Phone: 117, Richmond, Natal. 422 KADWA, Cassim Ahmed: b. 19th December, 1915, Umzinto, Natal. Businessman. Educated: St. Annes School, Umzinto. Fifth son of Yusuf Ahmed Kadwa of Kathor and Umzinto, Natal. Established business — Kassim Cash Store — 1939. Entered business scene as Manager — 1930 (LS. & ALL. Kadwa). Also holds interests: Kassim & Sons (1956). Active in Communal, Educational and Re- ligious matters, Activities: Treasurer: Umzinto Islamic Mos- que and Madressa; Committee Member: Umzinto Indian High School Committee; Islamia Madressa School Fund Committee; Rec.: Angling; S 6;D 3; Haj: 1952 and also in 1967. Well-travelled, India, Pakistan, Mauritius, Aden, African Territories. Bus. Add.: Main St., Umzinto (P. O. Box 140); Res. Add.: Main Street, Umzin- to; Phone: 72, Umzinto, Natal. “7 24 KADWA, Mahomed Hoosen: Bookkeeper. Educated: Umzinto Indian School; b. 5th February, 1929, Umzinto, Natal. Son of Moosa Ismail Kadwa of Umzinto and Kathor, District Surat, India. Prominent Sport Administrator in the South Coast area. Was.elected to Local Affairs Com. — Marburg, 1967. Chairman: Marburg L.A C.; Secretary: P.S.D.C.U.; P.S.D.S.A.; Trustee and Secretary: Port Shep- stone Jumma Masjid and Madressa Trust; Y. M. Muslim Welfare Soc.; Member: Marburg Indian Rate- payers Association; Boxing Promoter. Rec.: Cricket and Soccer; Married: Ayesha Kadwa of Umzinto, Natal; $ 23 D 5. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 42, Phone: 35, Port Shepstone} Res, Add.: Sunnyside Farm, Marburg; Phone: 125, Port Shepstone, Natal. 7 20 KAJEE, Ahmed Sadeck: Director of Companies; b. 1904, Durban. Educated: Higher Grade School, Durban. Son of Mahomed Ahmed Kajee of Kathor, District Surat, : India. Joined family business at an early age. Established own af business in 1933 as Kajee Bros. in a West Street, Durban, in 1933. , Runs other interests at Mapumulo and Thrings Post. Prominent poli- tical figure. Was on delegation to India, 1946, S.A.LC. appeal for withdrawal of High Commissioner and imposition of sanctions, Was first President: N.I.O. Nominated to S.A. Indian Council, 1964. Executive Member of Council. Was first Indian to be invited to State President’s investiture at Pretoria, Active in Social, Cultural and Educational spheres. Trustee: Madressa Anjuman Islam; Indian Member: Kind Edward VIII Hospital Advisory Board for almost twenty five years. Colonel: Overport Muslim Brigade; Vice President: Dur- van Indian Surf Life Savers’ Club; Patron: North Coast C.U.; Merebank Islamic Society; Orientals C.C. (P. M. Burg) Umhlatuzana Township Muslim Association; Com. Member: M. L. Sultan Technical Coliege Council; Life President: Muslims C.C. (Durban). Travel: M.E. and Haj, India and ‘Pakistan. Married: Fathima I. M. Haffejee. Bus. Add.: 26 Alice Street, Durban; Phone: 25436; Res. Add.: 26 Alice Street, Durban — Phone: 25436. 73) KAJEE, Ahmed Suleman: Direc- tor of Companies and Insurance Consultant; b. 10th December, 1918, Stanger, Natal. Educated: Stanger Govt. Indian School. Son of Suleman Eb. Kajee. Origin: Ankrod, District Surat, India. Director of Asso. Companies — Stanger Builders & Hardware; Stanger General Wholesalers (Pty.) - Ltd.; Stanger Motor Graveyard; fo.» Kajee’s Agencies; North Coast Ins. Brokers; Stanger Finance Co.; Agents for Pearl Assurance Co. and Dist. Manager; Union and Natal ky »., Marine & Trade Ins. Co.; Std. & Gen. Ins. Co.; B.P. South Africa and Southern Building Society. Family business of S. E. Kajee & Sons, first established, 1920 at Kutandaneni, North Coast. Activities: Past Trustee: Stanger Madressa Anjum a Islam; Past Treasurer: Stanger Ratepayers Association; Treasurer: Ankrod Madressa Trust; Rec.: Cricket. Hobbies: Coin Collecting. Achieved Million Rand Club in Ins., 1963. Outstanding award, 1964 (Ins. write-up). Married: Amina M. Motala, Dannhauser; S 5; D 7. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 136, 32 Couper Street, Stanger, Phone: 36; Res. Add.: 32 Couper Street, Phone: 36, Stanger, Natal.

---

