# Southern Africa Indian Who's Who (1971-72)

**Book ID:** southern-africa-whos-who-1971-pt4
**Total Pages:** 12

---

## Page 1

98 F-3-$.$-$-2-$ 3.5.5 £55 $.3. 5.3 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Hajee Abdul N. M. Ebrahim Family of Pretoria HESIOD DA HRD ERED BERD BA BBE BD DB I IB BD DH DB + BS EBRAHIM, Abdul M. N. (Hajee); Businessman. b. 7th November, 1904, Ranavav, India. Educated: Ranavav, India. Educated: Ranavav, Kathiawad. Son of Noor Mahomed Ebrahim (1893). Arrived in South Africa in 1916. Prop.: N. M. Ebrahim & Co. (1904); A.C.N.M. Ebrahim & Hajee Abdul (Pty.) Ltd. Joined family business in 1922 — N. M. Ebrahim & Co.; Established own business A.C.N.M. Ebrahim & Hajee Abdul (Pty.) Ltd. in 1957. Previously in partnership. Other activities: Trustee: Ranavav Himayatul Islam; Was City Councillor — Ranavav City Council (1937/39); Trustee: Pretoria Juma Masjid (1935/69); Pretoria Memon Madressa; Life Trustee: Ranavay Anjuman Islam; Married: Zulaikha, daughter of Hajee Cassim of Ranavav, India; S 7; D 3;P. O. Box 223, 60 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria; Phone: 30755; Res. Add.: SESE 90 SH HEI IK IN HEH HE IK 60 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria, Transvaal. 484 EBRAHIM, Ebrahim A.N.M.: Businessman; b. 15th Aug., 1926; Educated: Pretoria High School and Kathiawad. Eldest son of Hajee A.N.M. Ebrahim. Director of Hajee’s Agencies. Also connected with family business; Married: Jainab, daughter of A. D. Mothiar of Johannesburg; S 2; D 2; Add.: 60 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria, Transvaal. 4A EBRAHIM, Hajee Alli A.N.M.: Businessman; b. 28th July, 1928. Educated: Pretoria High and Kathiawad. Director: London Wholesalers. Connected with Family Group. Married: Fathima, daughter of Hajee Ismail Cassim Adam of Pretoria; D 2; Bus. Add.: 74 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria. Aal EBRAHIM, Osman A.N.M.: Medical Practitioner, b. LOth March, 1940.- Educated: Pretoria High and Dow Medical College, Karachi. Now practicing at Pretoria. Was active participant in student affairs. Married: Maymoona, daughter of O. H. Mohamed of Johannesburg; S$ 1;D 1. 492 EBRAHIM, Omar A.N.M.: Businessman, b. 6th October, 1941, Educated: Pretoria High School. Director: Hajee Abdul (Pty.) Ltd. and family Group. Married: Raziya, daughter of A. H. Kurtha; S$ 1;D 1; Widely travelled: Rec.: Soccer. 49% EBRAHIM, Mohammed Hoosen A.N:M.: Medical Student. b. 12th November, 1943. Educated: Pretoria High and Dow Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan. 444 EBRAHIM, Haroon A.N.M.: Student; b. 7th October, 1948. Educated: Pretoria High and St. Patrick’s, Karachi, Pakistan. Is now doing third year B. Comm. ans EBRAHIM, Rafic A.N.M.: Student; b. 7th May, 1950, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High and M. L. Sultan Tech. College, Durban; Motor Engineering Student. Keen Sportsman. F THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 99 ETRE TRETATA MOETREBEBE HL SERRE BE HE BE TOEDEE HE BB BEBE MEDS H HE 3 NEB HE HE HEHEHE BOE BEBE 3 2 FS 3 2 2 9 20 2 33 SSS SSS JE bd The H. 8. Ebrahim Family of Pretoria x % Fd x x % Fd % FJ Ed HIE EHDA NOEHOEIE IOENOEIE NOESOEIE NOE IE NOEHOEIM, HE HE HOE HOE BE HE HIE HOEHE I HEME DH NE JOCBK HOEHE AIOE J CHEEK BJ J 2 BI ED J DE 44 Born in Ranavav, India, in 1884, the late Hajee Suliman Ebrahim arrived in this country in 1896 and settled in Pretoria. From an early age he was thrown into the hurly burly of early Pretoria business life and sheer determina- tion and business acumen were the ingredients which helped carve out a niche in S. A. business which is a tribute to the man and his many qualities. He began as a hawker on the Pretoria-Pietersburg raj] route. It was a tough initiation for the intrepid young man and it was to serve him well in the days ahead. After a short stay: in India during the Boer War period, he returned to S.A., and in 1914, established the first of the Retail stores in Pretoria. By 1914, he owned a number of retail stores and in the same year, the Wholesale firm of N. M. Ebrahim & Co. was born. Over this period, the various enterprises prospered and in 1927, he went to Britain for the first time. An operation some what dampened his ardour to see as much of the country and Europe and so it wasn’t a year before he was back in London to build business contacts which were necessary for the further expansion of business interests at home. In 1935, the firm of H. S. Ebrahim (Pty.) Ltd. was established. It was a pinnacle of -all the years-of trial and tribulation, of sweat and toil. In the Social, Cultural, Political and Educational fields too he was by no means behind. He served his people well in every sphere of public activity. In 1939, he was instru- mental in bringing together the dissident groups, the T.I.C. and the T.I.O. It was during this marathon discussion that he suffered his first heart attack. He never really recovered from this it was to trouble him until his death in 1951. Over the years, he was honoured on numerous occasions with leading public posts which he declined. He preferred to serve rather than accept such honours, In Ranavav, India, he received the signal honour of being titled Raj Manthri for outstanding services to the State. In 1947, another honour came this way. He was presented to the late King George the VI during the royal visit to this country. In the field of education, he started a Madressa in one of his own buildings. In later years was established the Hajee Suleman Ebrahim Charitable Trust which was to become one of the leading Bursary awarding Trusts in the Republic. It was initially for the study of Medicine and now embraces many branches of study in S.A. and over- seas, catering for all nationalities. His death at the age of sixty seven robbed this country of one of its outstanding men. He left an indelible imprint, in every field of activity. He left behind a country and a community, the poorer by his early demise. I EM EE EE HE CE 49 EBRAHIM, Joosub Hajee Suliman, ' Director of Companies; b. Pretoria, ' FEducated: Pretoria. Eldest son of Ebrahim of Ranavav and Pretoria. Chairman: Hajee Suliman Ebrahim Charitable Trust. Director of H.S. Ebrahim Group, of Companies. Widely travelléd — has toured almost every major country in the . world. Int. in the furtherance of education and cultural activities. Rec.: Photography and Travel. Married: Amina, daughter of Hajee Mahomed Joosub_ of Pretoria; S 1;D 3; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 709, Pretoria; Phone: 24996; Res. Add.: 79 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria; Phone: 23798. 418 EBRAHIM, Omar H.S.: Director of Companies; b. 3rd Feb., 1922, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High School. Director of H.S. Ebrahim Family Group of Companies and other subsidiaries. Has travelled extensively. All major countries. Rec.: Literature and Travel. Married: Ayesha, daughter of Hajee Ismail Cassim Adam of Pretoria; S 4;D 3; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 709, Pretoria; Phone: 24996; Res. Add.: 77 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria; Phone: 24996 Ext. +29 EBRAHIM, Haroun Suliman: Director of Companies; b. 4th July, 1943. Educated: Pretoria High, London Academy and London University. Director: H. S. Ebrahim Group of Compa- nies and Subs. Also amateur photographer. a5 SOO0 EBRAHIM, Liaquat Alli Omar: Student; b. 8th October, 1948, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High, London Academy and London University (Queen’sCollege); B.Sc. Economics. So) EBRAHIM, Rashid Omar: Student; b. 30th November, 1946, Pretoria. Eldest son of Omar H. S. Ebrahim, Edu.: Pretoria High, London Academy and London University.

---

## Page 2

100 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ALPEN HEHEHE IER II TOOL IIL LIT ET IO LITT DDD DDD PTT HOI x sol The arrival of the first of the Essa’s goes back to 1895 when Essa Jan Mahomed settled in Natal, choosing Pietermaritzburg, where first cousins of the family, the Moosa’s, had already established themselves. For a number of years he remained with the Moosa family and in 1920, he established a retail store in Longmarket Street and in 1927, he was joined by his sons, Abdul Gani and Abdul Gaffoor. In 1933, A. G. Essa launched out on his own and it was from this stage onwards that the Essa’s developed into the well-known wholesale merchants that they are today, Essa Jan Mahomed led a more or less retired life from this period onwards until his death in 1953. He was born in Jodiya, Kathiawad, India in 1883. sot ESSA, Abdul Gani: Businessman. b. 1905, Jodiya, India. Arrived in South Africa, 1917. Joined family business— E. J. Mahomed — 1927. Established own business, 1933 as A. G. Essa; Leading Retail and Wholesale Merchants. (Popularly known as Gani’s Store). Was appointed local distributing agent by S. A. Govt. during 1939/45 conflict of ali rice imports, Pietermaritzburg and District. Other activities: Trustee: P. M. Burg Masjid and Islamic School Trust; Treasurer: Raisethorpe Muslim Society, 1956/71. Holds various other posts in local Religious, Cultural and Welfare bodies. Retired since 1950. Has travelled widely — India, Pakistan, M.E., E.A., and P.E.A.; Married: Khatija, daughter of Osman Joosub of Dhrol, Kathiawad; S 5; D 4; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 488; 480 Church Street, Pietermaritzburg; Phone: S1581/2. Res. Add.: 480 Church Street, Pietermaritzburg; 23 Oaklands Road, Mountain Rise, Pietermaritzburg; Phone: 51581/2. The A. G. Essa Family of Pietermaritzburg sn Yk HERE NOEL TOTTI TO OLED LODE DBD HELE EE Fe -$ $$ 8-5. $$ ESSA, Amod A. Gani: Director of Companies; b. 22nd Septem ber, 1927, P. M. Burg. Educated: Paul’s and Woodlands High, P. M. Burg. Eldest son of A. G. Bassa. Joined family business — A. G. Essa -- 1942. Takes a keen interest in all local activities. Com, Mem.: Raisethorpe Muslim Society; Comm. Member: P. M. Burg Mas- jid and Islamia School Trust: Member: P. M. Burg and Durban Chambers of Commerce, Other interests: Travel and Indian Music. Has toured India, Pakistan, U.K., and Europe, U-S.A., Far East, M.E. (Haj), P.E.A. and East Africa; Married: Rabia, daughter of Sacoor Mahomed of P. M. Burg; S 3; D 4; Res. Add.: 480 Church Street, P. M. Burg; Phone: 51581/2. SoS ESSA, Abu Bucker A. G.: Director of Companies; b. Sth March, 1929, Pietermaritzburg. Educated: St. Pauls and Woodiands High, P. M. Burg. Joined family business in 1943. General Manager — A. G. Essa & Sons, since 1950. Other activities: Committee Member: Raisethorpe Muslim Society; Member: P. M. Burg and Durban Chambers of Commerce. Sports: Cricket and Tennis; Travel: U.K., and Europe, M.E. (Haj); Married: Amina, daughter of Hassim Moosa of Pietermaritzburg; S 4; D 2; Res. Add.: 480 Church St., Pietermaritzburg; Phone: 51581/2. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO BoC EBRAHIM, Aboobaker: Businessman and Public Book- keeper; b. 18th July, 1914, Ranavav, Saurastra, India. Educated: Ranavav and Pietersburg; Son of Ebrahim Tayob; Origin: Ranavav, India. Entered business scene — 1932 — T. M. Tayob (1895). One of pioneer firms in Pietersburg. Is now sole proprietor of present firm. Interested in Philosophy & Comp. Religion. Activities: Member: Pietersburg Indian School Committee. Rec.: General Literature; Married: Hanifa, daughter of Abmed Hajee Mohamed of Pretoria; S -;D 6; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 66; 37c Market Street, Pietersburg; Phone: 3077; Res Add.: 40 Joubert Street, Pietersburg, Transvaal. , a) EBRAHIM, Anwar: Businessman; b. 15th November, 1915 Porbandar, Ginginat, India. Son of Ebrahim Ismail. Ebrahim Ismail first arrived in South Africa in 1887. He settled in Johannesburg. Moved to Wolmaranstad in 1912 and established Ebrahim Bros. Was previously associated with E. D. Bobat & Co. in partnership and then carried on business as Ebrahim Bros. in 1903. Pioneer — Ismail Soomra — 1874. Activities: W/Chairman: Muslim Jamat — Wolmaranstad; Captain: Wolmaranstad C.C., Rep of Western Transvaal on numerous occasions. Chairman: Wolmaranstad Muslim Com.; Member: Inst. of Bookkeeper (U.K.); Sports: Tennis, Coin Collecting; Married: Rehana daughter of Essa Joosub; S 4; D 7; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 25, Wolmaranstad; Phone 16;Res. Add.: Broadbent Street Wolmaranstad; Phone: 16 Ext. ‘ S08 sa EBRAHIM, Suleman: Businessman: b. 10th Walwad, Kolaba District, India. Educated: Sule ae Son of Ebrahim Dawood. Origin: Walwad, India. Estab. Ebrahim’s Store in 1948. Retailers and Cafe. Takes a keen interest in all home (Walwad) and Cape communal acts. Other Activities: Member: Walwad Welfare, Waterworks and Educational Society; Member: Lansdowne Ahmedia Mosque; Travel: India, Pakistan, Europe, M.E., E.A. Married: Hawa, daughter of Late Essack Osman of Cape Town; S 7; D 5, Bus. Add.: 596 Lansdowne Road, Cape Province; Phone: 774752. soy EMMANUEL, Sam Anthony: Businessman; b. 11th June, 1887, Kimberley, Cape Province; Educated: Kimberley. Colourful personality. Rep. Griquas at Soccer and Cycling ~ Rep. Griqualand in both codes. Cape Champion Cyslist at Paarl, 1911. Billiards Champion, 1910, Kimberley. Acti- vities: Manager: Griquas 1920; Auditor: S.A.I.F. Board 1904; Secretary: Griquas West I_F.A., 1907/13; Secretary: Coloured Cricket Board — Kimberley, 1913; President: Coloured B. Assoication, Cape Town, 1925; President; E.P.LF.A., 1926; Hon. L.V.P.; Patron and Donor: Mani Sam s Cape Quad Cup; Patron: E.P.1.F.U. and Cricket Union; Sports: Soccer: Interprov. - Durban — Griqualand West. S. A. Tourney 1913, (Captain). Married: Anthonimal daughter of late A. Lazarus of Johannesburg; S 4; D u Bus. Add.: 793 Main Street, P.E. N/E. Phone: 46715: Res. Add.: 13 Rdgar Lane, P.E., N/E; Phone: 48037. SiO ESSOP, ISMAIL, Dr.; (D.C., N.D., D.Hom., D.Sc. (Bio.) S.A.) Reg . Chiropractor, Naturopath, Homeo- path-& Bio-Chemist. One of the first Non-white Chiropractors to practice as such in this country. Add: 16 Stockroos St., P.O. Box 843, Kimberley,S.A. Phone:5580. “THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO” Make use of them. i { advertising pages reach men at the top. j }

---

## Page 3

102 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO sll The Hajee Ahmed Omar Finger Family of Louis Trichardt The first of the Finger family arrived here at the turn of the century and settled in Johannesburg. Omar Dada Finger established his first business in Johannesburg soon after his arrival. His eldest son, Ahmed Omar, arrived in South Africa in 1915 and joined his father in business and at his father’s death, he left Johannesburg to settle in Ermelo where he joined the firm of Cassim Tayob’s with whom he was associated for over thirty years. In 1949 he established his‘first business in partnership with Osman A. B. until 1961 when he branched out on his own and established Bob’s Bazaar. He died in 1969 at the age of sixty six. He was born in Porbandar, India. in 1903. He was a keen worker for the welfare of his community and took a leading part in the erection and management of the local Mosque and Madressa. He was also a Vice Chairman of the Louis Trichardt Muslim Jamaat. He visited India on numerous occasions and performed Haj in 1965. Travel: Middle East and Pakistan. Siz MOHAMED, Siddik Ahmed O.: Businessman (Finger); b. 27th December, 1938 at Porbandar, India. Educated: Por- bandar and Louis Trichardt Indian Schoo]. Son of Ahmed Qmar Finger. Origin: Porbandar, India. Entered business scene in 1956 — Rooi Winkel. Established own business, . Bob’s Bazaar — 1961. Furniture and Electrical appliances dealers. Agents: General Bedding (Pty.) Ltd.; Travel: P.E.A., Rhodesia and Swaziland; Activities: Past Treas.: L.T.F.C.; Louis Trichardt Muslim Jamaat; Committee Member: Louis Trichardt Muslim Jamaat; Rec.: Soccer and Cricket; Married: Zubeida, daughter of Moosa Ganie of Pietersburg; D 2; Bus, Add.: P. O. Box 256, Louis Trichardt; Phone: 220, Res. Add.: 23 Trichardt Street — Louis Trichardt; Phone: 220. S\2 MOHAMED, Omar Ahmed O. Finger: Ex Teacher — now Manager; b. 19th July, 1940 at Porbandar, India (Sumas- tra); Educated: Louis Trichardt Indian School, Pieters- burg and Transvaal College of Education — T.T.D.; B.A.; Majoud. (Sys. Phyl. and Psychology) — Ist year B.Ed. — Ex- Teacher. Now Manager — Elin Stores — near Elin Hospital. Activities: Past Secretary: Louis Trichardt Indian Educational Committee; Ex Editor: J.C.E. News Bulletin. Interested in all local activities; Tennis and Cricket; Married: Nazmunisha, daughter of Saleh M. Omar of Pietersburg; D 1; Travel: P.E.A.; Rhodesia and the Republic. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 103 FAKI, Mohamed Jaffer: Businessman; b. 1927, Panderi, Ratnagiri, Bombay, India. Educated: Panderi School, Pretoria Indian High School, Pretoria Technical College. Son of Faki Jaffer Shamsudeen. Entered business in 1944, Proprietor — Iscor Cash Bazaar, College Super Market, Jaffer’s Motor Spares, Jaff’s Cafe. Also runs Christmas Hamper Club — Jaffes Xmas Hampers. Interested in all communal activities. Has visited India, P.E., Rhodesia. Fond of Travel and Religious Literature. Activities: Treas: Panderi Muslim Society — Pretoria, S.A. Was Com. Mem.: Pretoria Islamic Society (1964); Sports: Soccer; Married: Khatija Mohamed Ebrahim Hasware; S 4; D 3. Bus. Add.: 591 Car] Street, Pretoria West; Phone: 795993; Res. Add.: 246 — 13th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria; Phone: 795957. siS FRANK, Benjamin Desmond; Insurance Rep.; b. 13th October, 1927 at Ladysmith, Natal. Educated: Ladysmith Govt. School. Son of Percy Frank formerly of Ladysmith and now Newcastle, Natal. Was in turn Tailor and Senior Clerk in large organisations. Joined Insurance field in 1958. Full-time Insurance man from 1960. Attached to Norwich Union, Ladysmith and N. Natal. One of top reps. with Company. Outstanding Sportsman: Northern Dists., Northern Natal — rep. (Sam China) and Natal “B” at Soccer. Plays Cricket for Railways C.C. Keen Snooker and Tennis Player. Other Activities: Secretary: M. L. Sultan School — Education Committee; Vice President: Comrades Tennis Club; Married: Nagamma; Granddaughter of late Sardar Chetty of Ladysmith; S 3; D 1; Bus. Add.: 34 Madras Road, Ladysmith; Phone: 1751. SiG FRANK, James Arthur: School Teacher; b. 28th December, 1921, Nottingham Road, Natal Educated: Lidgetton Indian School; T3 — B (Ext.). Second son of Arthur Frank of Nottingham Road area. Founder of the school 1937. Teacher and Principal until Govt. Aided Status in 1946. Popu- Jar and outstanding Sportsman and Administrator. Was President: Nottingham Football and Cricket Clubs; Secretary: P. M. Burg Cricket Union (1949/51). Presi- dent: Nottingham Road Parent/ Teachers Association; Also delegate to Natal F.A. —Weenen County F.A. Founder and President: Lions River District Schools Sport Association; Secretary and Treasurer: Nottingham Road Horticulture Society. Active Soccerite - Cricketer - Table Tennis and Tennis Player; Soccer: Young Natalians. Rep. P. M. Burg and County Asso. — 1935/50. Nt. | — Sam China 1945/47/49. Weenen County — Sunday League 1935/50. Was a member of Springboks F.C. (Mooi River); Cricket: Royals C.C. Young Nataliansand Nottingham Road C.C, Rep. Weenen County 1950/63. Isa member of Full Gospel Missionary movement. Interested in Religious studies; Married: Manorman, d/o Mrs. and the late A. C. Pillay of Nottingham; Add.: Mt. Rise School, P. M. Burg; Res. Add.: 85 Bolhambra Way, New Holmes, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. © One en Cen en Ce Deen entienst DC GE Dt SE ) ND} <1) RF EE > ER) ED CD (2D (1A 1 4) (1 |) RD) IND 1D | A ) ID 1) ED) {ED 6) I (DC) THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN “WHO'S WHO" The only publication of its kind in Southern Africa which provides for personalities in every field of Indian activity. When you think of advertising — there is no better medium A >A PEED > GP} HN FG D-DD GD PCED 5A CD) 1} -D-{-<GA |SR1D } SE 1 1 D1) 7) 3 (1 A) A) D(C Oe ee ee ee ee ee ®

---

## Page 4

02 Si GABRU, Ahmedie: Invoice Clerk; b. 29th March, 1945, Potchefstroom, Transvaal; Educated: Potchefstroom. Son of Ismail Gabru; Origin: Dahbel, India. Connected with N. B. Wholesalers since 1964. Outstanding Cricketer. Rep. Transvaal — Opening Batsman — Kimberley 1969/70. Led Transvaal averages and aggregate. Rep. Transvaal Schools and under twenty three. Activities: Potchefstroom United F. C.; Selector: Potchefstroom Cricket Club; Sports: Cricket, Soccer and Tennis. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 90, Potchefstroom; Phone: 4381; Res. Add.: 123 Asiatic Bazaar; Phone: 4613. Sig GANASEE, Rosan: Farmer and Businessman; b. 7th Nov., 1922. Educated: Tinley Manor Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Ganasee Ramdath of Umvoti and . grandson of Ramdath of Chapia, ULP., India. Ganasee Ramdath the elder of the Ganasees of Grontville area up to his death in 1950. The Ganasee Bros. then took over and Rosan Ganasee the third son of Ganasee Ramdath, ran part of the farm which the family retains to this day. Also active as Cartage Contractors in the Lower Tugela area. Activities: Chairman: Edu. Committee: Radha Roopsingh School; Central Committee Member: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Sec.: Gledhow Indian Mill Group. Interested in all Social and Communal activities in the Groutville area. Travel}: India - 1966; Married: Manjaree Manooa of Merebank; $ 3; D 3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Groutville, Natal; Phone: 1404, Stanger, Res. Add.: Groutville. Si4 GANI, Hajee Siddick: Businessman; b. 8th August, 1905, Tongaat. Origin: Aliabada, Kathiawad. Son of old pioneer, Ganie Ismail (1896). The family business was established in 1900. Hajee Siddick joined firm — Ganie Ismail — 1923. Now runs the business and subsidiary ~ Tongaat Whole- salers. Travel: India, Pakistan and Middle East and Haj. Married: Hanifa, daughter of N. M. Saleh Mahomed of Jamnagar, India; S$ 6; D 6. Isa Committee Member: Anjuman Islam, Tongaat; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 55, Tongaat, Natal; Phone: 31; Res. Add.: Plein Street, Ton- gaat; Phone: 31 Ext. $209 4 GANI, Saleh Mohamed: Inter- Science, Aligar; F.1.B.A. — S.A. b. 14th September, 1924, India. Educated: St. Anthonys, Durban; Sastri and Aligar, India. Son of ny Hajee Gani. Was formerly in the Retail Trade, 1956/60. Public Bookkeeping Agency, 1906. Is rep. Yorkshire Insurance Com- pany; Norwich Association Soc.; ——s ae Activities: Former Secretary: Brits ! Mohammedan Madressa, Member AN A, and F/Secretary: Brits Indian School Parents’ Committee; Rec.: Reading. Travel: India, Pakistan, P-E.A. and E.A.; Married: Ayesha N.M.O. Shaveri; S 1; D3. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 545, Brits, Phone: 725; Phone: 741. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO ot GARDEE, Mohamed Mahmood: Director of Companies; b. Sth August, 1910, Dabhel, India. Son of Mahmood Moosa Gardee. Edu.: Bree Street Indian and Alighar Muslim College. Established own business — M. M. Gardee — 1936, Wholesale Fancy Goods Mer- chants. Retired: Member of various organisations. Interests: Social and Cultural activities. Activities: Secretary: Suleiman N. Memorial Trust; Vice President: Johannesburg Indian Social Wel- fare Association; Executive Mem.: Council — Islamic Association Trust; Trustee: Johannes- burg Indian Sports Ground Association; Sports: Tennis (islamic Country Club); Married: S$ 1; Res. Add.: 69 Bree Street, Newton, Johannesburg, Transvaal. s2a Be: GARDA, Rashid Ahmed: Repre- ie sentative; b. 12th December, 1926. Lachpur, District Surat, India. Educated: Johannesburg Indian Primary and Johannesburg High. Son of Mohamed S. Garda. Origin: Lachpur. Manufacturers Rep. since 1949. Leading Insurance Broker — Gany’s Agency. Became Sports Administrator, 1943. Has held every post of importance in Soccer and Cricket in the Transvaal and South Africa. Captained all branches of sport at school — 1943 - 1945. Rep. Wits. and Transvaal — Soccer. Refreed every Transvaal final — 1955/1960 ; Instrumental in starting Pro. Soccer in Transvaal and South Africa, Rep. South Africa Indiansv/s Bantu and Coloureds. Rep. Transvaal in S. A. Tourneys — 1946/56. Director: Transvaal United Pro. XI. Instrumental in organising Kenya Tour to and from South Africa. Also West Indies Tour. Was on negotiation — Pakistan, India and U.K. for a Cavalier tour to South Africa. Activities: Cricket: H.L.V.P.: Wits Cricket Union; Transvaal Cricket Union, Executive Member: S. A. Cricket Board of Control; President: Wits F. Union; Executive Member: Transvaal Indian Football Association; Del. Cricket and Soccer to both federations; Member: Working Committee S.A.S.L.; L/Trustee: Jhb. Indian Sports Ground Association; Umpire: Kenya C/Tests and Inter-race Soccer Finals. Rec.: Soccer, Cricket and Social; Married: Hajira, daughter of M. E. Nagdi of Jhb. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 42120, Fordsburg, Johannesburg; Phone: 838-6027; Res. Add.: 67 Avenue Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg; Phone: 838-6027. $23 GHAZI, Karamchand Mathura: Senior Clerk; b. 7th July, 1929, Newcastle, Natal. Educated: St. Oswalds School. Joined African Metals Corporation, 1951, Senior Clerk. Activities: Vice President: Lennoxton Tennis Club; Treasurer: Newcastle Ind. Sports Ground Association; Vice President: Hindi Pra. Shabha; Commitee Member: Rama- krishna Centre; Elected to L.A.C. — Newcastle (1969); Was Secretary: Newcastle Indian Ratepayers Association. Sports: Tennis (Lennoxton T. C.); Hobby: Philately. Married: Sathwathi, daughter of S. Bedasie of Newcastle; S 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 2, Newcastle; Res. Add.: Boundry Road, Lennoxton. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO IE EEE AIA EK x 524 GANESH, Latchman: Director of Companies; b. 1891, Son of Latchman Chauhan; Negi entines ones Travel Goods Manufacturer, 1937. Took a keen interest in all local and Indian national acts in South Africa Activities: Was Patron and Office Bearer of numerous Lage hatte Oe pe: Cultural and Religiously clined. Travel: India, East an i ied: Ean Pokneiee auee. and Central Africa. Died: 525 GANESH, Bal. K.: Director of Companies; b. 6th May, 1916, at Clare Estate, Durban. Educated: Clairwood Indian Govt. Aided School. Sastri College. Eldest son of Lutchman Ganesh. Origin:Ba- ragon, U.P., India. Qualifications: T3, B.A. (Hindu-Ratna), India; Joined family business — Corona- tion Truck Works ~ 1942. Is now Managing Director. Is a Prolific Writer. One of few whose articles have been accepted by South a ee Only Hindi .A. to have passed under auspi of the Varda College, India. Travel: India and Coatel dna The Lutechman Ganesh Family HEE RASE IE BE IE EET I HE HEHE IE IB IH INIT BEBE HE BEDI BM HEHEHE HB BO BH BEBE NOE HOES BH HEHE BX BO HEH HCH BB HE HEH SB EH 105 \ 4 x x x x x x x x x E3 % East Africa. Was associated with various sports bodies in Durban and District over the years; Secretary: Hindi Shiksa Sang (South Africa); Founder Member and Ex. President: Hindi Mithra Mandal (Durban); Rec.: Literature, Classical Music; Married: Sarasvathee, daughter of M. Rambharas of Edendale; § 1; D 3. Bus. Add.: 160 Sirdar Road, Clairwood; Phone: 814439; Res. Add.: 38-29th Umhlatuzana Township, Durban; Phone: —. S$2G GANESH, Sarasvathee: House- wife; b. Edendale. Educated: Plessislaer Govt. Aided School, Durban. Was one of the Finalists (2nd Prize) Gandhi Centenary Celebrations at Phoenix. Takes an active part in various other cultural and religious bodies. Travel: India and African territories. Hobbies: Literature. Director: Coronation Truck Works (Pty.) Ltd., Durban. Activities: F/Member and Ex. President: Clairwood Shree Samaj 7 ada Mahila Mandal; j ice President: Hindi Mi Mandal, Indian Womens’ Activity Group aie iakeaten $29 GHELA, Harkishan: Businessman: b. 29th February, 1920, P. M. Burg; Educated: St. Anthony’s and York Road School. Son of Ghela Dayaram of Pietermaritzburg and Surat District (Gandevi), India. Is a Progressive Merchant Tailor in Central Indian area, P. M. Burg — Ghela Dayaram & Sons. Acts.: Active in various Social, Sports and Religious bodies. Hon. Life President: Vedic Dharma Sabha; Secretary and Treasurer: V.D.S. Crematoriam; President: Gujarati Vedic Society; Com. Member: Aryan Benevolent Home; Treasurer: Pietermaritzburg Sports Association; Hon. Life Vice President: P. M. Burg Indian Cricket Union; President: P. M. Burg United Tennis Club; Sports: Tennis Natal League; Rec.: Travel; Res. and payee 179 Retief Street, Pietermaritzburg; Phone: S2& GHOOR, Ahmed Dada: Business- as man; b. 5th December, 1910, ya ™, Ranavay, India. Edu.: Ranavay, India. Son of Dada Cassim Ghoor. Joined family at very early age. | wer Established own business in ‘ 1936 — Amies Burma House — Vryburg (1945). Tong — ‘‘Amies” — 1949. One of leading members of the local tennis circle. Interested in all Cultural and Religious acts. Travel: Europe, India, U.K., Canada, U.S., Pakistan, Far East. Established, “K. C. Candies” - ; “ e Cape Town. One of first Indian sweet factories in the Peninsula. Now residing in Vryburg. Activities: Past Treasurer: Kismet Lawn Tennis Club; United C. C.; Rovers F. C.; - all Vryburg; Past Chairman: Vryburg Muslim Jamaat; Sports: Tennis; Rec.: Soccer and Cricket, Married: Zuleika, daughter of Abdud Karrim of Pretoria; S 4; D 1; Add.: P. O. Box 152, Vryburg.

---

## Page 5

106 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO EOE EERIE IEE REED DIDI RE BE BH BA IM EE BID IIB I IO REE EDAD I II F..3 The L. M. Gatta Family | x of Pretoria x x 3 ” S2 FAIA IL IEEE HE IK HEI WHE HE IK II TIE HEH HIB TE BIE HEHE BI HB HB HEHEHE SOIREE REDE BRITA ED TB BF EIB II FEB BO IE IIE FOE HE IIE HEIR IK IK I IK II The Gatta family arrival can be traced back to 1906 when Ismail Mahomed, after a number of years in the Northern Transvaal town of Pietersburg, opened a retail and whole- sale business in Prinsloo Street, Pretoria, in 1918. The firm continued under this name until 1949 when Gatta Trading Store came into being. I. M. Gatta was now joined. by his son, Ahmed, popularly known as “Amie”, in 1928. The senior Gatta retired in 1948. He took a keen interest in every local activity and was esteemed and respected by all sections of the community. He died in 1960 at the age of sixty eight. He was born in Ranavav, Kathiawad, India in 1892. S20 GATTA, Ahmed “Amie” Ismail: Businessman, b. |Sth June, 1914, Ranavav, India. Educated: Ranavav Victoria Islamic Madressa and Pretoria Govt. School. Only son of L M. Gatta of Ranavav and Pretoria. Arrived in South Africa in 1926. Joined family business in 1928. Sole Proprietor since 1932. Now trading as Gatta Trading Store Other activities: Trustee, Treasurer and Founder: Ranavav Himyatul Islam; Trustee and Treasurer: Pretoria Memon Madressa; Executive Member: Victoria Islamic Madressa; Life Member: Memon Society — India and Pakistan; Fund Raising Committee Member: Laudium Islamic Centre; Member of various other organisations and societies - Instrumental in fund raising — Ranavav Housing Scheme; Acted on behalf of Pretoria Memon Madressa Trust re. purchase Bulawayo property for investment. Has travelled widely — India, Pakistan, U.K. and Europe, M.E. and African countries. Haj: 1963 and 1969; Married: Halima, daughter of Hajee M.H.E. Moonda of Ranavav, India. S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: 165 Prinsloo Street, Pretoria; Phone: 30758; Res. Add.: 308 - Sth Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria. S23). GATTA, Nizamudeen Ahmed: Businessman; b. Lith Aug., 1946, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Boys High and Memon Madressa. Eldest son of Ahmed Gatta. Established business in Johannesburg — “The Spot” — 1966. Specialists — Clearing lines, Wholesale and Retail. Keen on Soccer and Cricket; Married: Hamida, daughter of A.T.M. Gatta of Mafeking; Bus. Add.: 21 a Commissioner Street, Johannes- burg; Phone: 8367246; Res. Add.: 308 - 5th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. $32 GATTA, Omar Ahmed: Student; b. 29th July, 1950, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High and University College, Durban; First year B. Comm. Keen on Soccer, Swimming and Cricket. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 107 IK IK IE HEHE FEE SEK IK x The pioneering member of the Ghelani’s arrived here in the mid-90’s and settled in Pretoria. Before that the family had for a short while stayed over in Madagascar and it was during the French occupation that the family made its way here. He established his first business in Pretoria before the Boer War and in 1904, was joined by his two sons, Vithaldas and Mohanlal. Between 1926 and 1933, Mohanlal established two trading stores at Sibase and Wyliespoort. In 1934, he gave up the latter business and continued Sibasa until his death in 1943 at the age of forty seven. Vithaldas Manjee Ghelaniestablished his first business in Louis Trichardt in 1914 and also ran an Agency business in Porbandar, Bombay, Akola and Virad, India. Public spirited, he took part in the first Passive Resistance Movement in 1908 and was amongst the first to be deported and that at the age of sixteen. The deporta- tion was the subject of questions in the House of Commons. He was re-admitted in 1911. Other activities: Secretary: HEHE IK HE IK BERK HEE HH HEI HK HOE HB BK HE HK HE HERE HK XE BK HEH HEB HE BO HA BOE HL BE HOEHL HOEHK NOEBH HE IH HB 3 HE I HHH HE HE HEB HH SD HI HH HH HE The Ghelani Family of Louis Trichardt s23 HEHE PEER IIB ERE IIIA RA ENGI IB BH TE HED, NEB BI BE HEHEHE BEB HH I HB BD BH BDH SB HEHEHE I I HH HII DH I SEE I HEE I TEI HE IK KDE HE Kathiawad Rajkaka Parishad and was also connected with the Louis Trichardt Hospital. The V.M.G. Ward was named after him. To the people of Banvad, India, he donated the V.M.G. High School and also established Banvad’s first Girl’s High School in 1960. GHELANI, Ramnikray Mohanlal: Businessman; b. 3rd February, 1918, Jamnagar, India. Educated: Jamnagar, India. Son of Mohantal Ghelani. Entered business scene in 1930. Took control of V. M. Ghelani & Co. ~ 1945. Also runs branches in Louis Trichardt and at Sibasa. Widely travelled, India, U.K. and Europe, and African countries. Rec.: Tennis; Married: Shanta, daughter of Harilal Vasram of Porbandar, India; S 1; D 3; Bus. Add.: P.O. Box 104, 104 Kruger Street, Louis Trichardt; Phone: 74; Res. Add.: 104 Kruger Street, Louis Trichardt; Phone: 74. S24 GOKOOL, Jumna Parsad: Director of Companies; b. Sth October, 1917, Glencoe District, Natal. Educated: Dundee Govt. Indian School. Moved to Durban in 1940. ”) Advisory circle Manager: “The / aie | Rising Sun” —- Hindi/English, ‘ “t . ! monthly. Rep. Durban Printing 3 Co. Entered into partnership — National Office Supplies, 1947. >. Managing Director until1960. Now Director: Durban Picture Frame ® Co.; Orient Art Gallery; -Multi fa Craft Centre; Activities: Member: Durban Art Gallery Association; South African Associatiun of Arts (Natal Branch); King Edward VIII Hospital Adv. Board; F.0.S.A. (Served in various capacities over last thirty years). Committee Member: Natal Indian Cripple Care Association; Durban Association for Indian Aged; Natal War Memorial Comm.; International Film Society and Member and Fund Comm. Member: Gandhi-Desai State Indian School; Hindu Tamil State Indian School. Jt. Hon. Secretary: Shree Sanathan Dharma Sabha, Natal; Trustee and Chairman: Overport Social Club. Member: Int. Parliamentary Debating Soc.; Fund Raising Comm. — Natal Inst. for Immunological Research. Trustee: Shri Vishnu Temple Sec. (Croftdene, Chatsworth). Pro-tem Chairman: 1860 Indian Settlers’ Association; Past Activities: Member and Secretary Asstnt. to Hon. Secs.: N.ILC. and S.A.IL-C. Ex-offico: S.A.LC. deputation to Prime Minister General J. C. Smuts, 1946; Executive Member: Royal Visit Rec. Comm. (formally presented to Royal family at official reception). Rep.: S.S.D.S./Shri Vishnu Temple (P.M. Burg), 1944/72, to S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha conferences and council meetings; Member: Republic of India Cel. Comm.; Durban Interna- tional Club; 5th and 10th Republican Festival Comms.; Educational Comm. — Surat Hindu State Aided Indian School (also Hon. Secretary). Initiator: Sea-side Holiday Tours — North Natal schools. Was Chairman: Natal Scholars’ Seaside Tour Committee (1956/67). Organiser: Arts of India Exhibition; Travel: India, Ceylon and Mauri- tius; Married: Surujpathi Mathura; S 3; D 2; Bus. Add.: 88b Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 65636; Res. Add.: 95 Rajab Bldgs., Queen Street, Durban; Phone: 25703. teen hy GOOL, Abdul Aziez: Businessman; b, 27th May, 1920, Campbellpur, N.W. Frontier. Educated: Campbeilpur, N.W. Frontier, Trafalgar Junior. Son of Sayed Gool. Joined family concern of Gools Cash Store in 1937. Established own business of Amla in 1960 at Goodwood. Moved to Elsies River in 1963. One of leading mineral water works in the Peninsula. Activities: Patron: Avenies C.C.; Chairman and Trustee: Goodwood Mosque; Trustee: Bishop Lavis Mosque Trust; West Pakistan Society (Chair- man); on the Board of Guardians, Muslim Assembly — Cape; Chairman: Pakistan Society; Travel: U.K., Europe, Canada, U.S., M.E., India, Pakistan. Keen worker in Religious field. Married: Tawgeeda, daughter of Right Hon. Issac Hartley of Cape Town; S 2; D 6; Bus. Add.: 9 Con- sani Road, Elsies River; Phone: 989547; Res. Add.: 42 - First Street, Elsies River, Cape Town.

---

## Page 6

108 SHIA EE IE TEI HER IER IY, HOEHHO SOE HK BEB IHD I HEHE BOE I IESE HE BH HEB HEHE HH HL HE HB 9 BI SS HS 2B 3 9 0 2 SBE SE DE 3% E.S-$ $$ 5.3.3 5-55 -¢-$-3- 2-2. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Aboo Osman Ghood Family of Pretoria SE EI EET EET ILI BD BEBE BURIED BBB BE BT SOB BBS BE HE BE BE SSBB BNE NE BBE BE BEBE BEBE BNE IE HE HEHE IE I IE EE Osman Moosa Ghood was a pioneer of the Pretoria area of the early eighty’s and was a trader who kept close business contacts with the Kruger family. A treasured possession of the family is a Kruger coin given by the President himself to Ghood during the early trading days. He made several trips to India over the years and in 1931, he left the shores of this country, never to return. He died in 1942 at the age of eighty in Ranavav, Kathiawad, where FE EXE EOE EEE he was born in 1862. sa GHOOD, Aboo Moosa: Business- man;b. 1901, Ranavav. Educated: Ranavav Madressa Prop. — B. B. Wholesalers — Pretoria. Previously knownas A.O. Ghood, established in 1931. Was a Member: Memon Welfare Society, Calcutta, India. Member: Memon Association — Johannesburg; Travel: India, Paki- stan and African countries; Married: Kathoon, daughter of M. M. Dambah of Pretoria; S 3; D 2; Bus. Add.: 298 Boom Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 27500; Res. Add.: 340 Jewel Street, Laudium (P.O. Box 13059), Pretoria, Transvaal. $33 GHOOD, Abdul Ganie Aboo: Businessman; b. 23rd March, 1923, Ranavav, Kathiawad. Edu.: Ranavav and Bree Street, Jhb. Eldest son of Aboo Osman Ghood. Trades in Indian textiles. Well- known in local circles. Religiously inclined; Married: Zubeida, daughter of A. M. Ghood of Pretoria West;S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13002, Laudium, Pretoria; Phone: 27500;Res. Add.: 326 Jewel Street, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. $24 ‘;GHOOD, Joe: Businessman; b. 26th September, 1936, Vrededorp, Johannesburg; Second son of Aboo Osman Ghood. Educated: Bree Street, Johannesburg. Sales Manager and Buyer, B. B. Whole- salers. Also Manufacturers of Wigs — GOOLBORA. Ladies Fashion Wigs. Popular figure. Interested in all activities. Married: Zainab, daughter of M. Ayob of Pretoria; S 1; D 1; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 13059, Laudium, Pretoria; Phone: 27500; Res. Add.: 349 Marble St., Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. SY¢o GHOOD, Nazimudin Aboo: Stu- dent; b. 1952, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria High and University of Cape Town. Eldest son of Abdul Ganie Ghood. Fourth year Medical Student. Keen on all Sports. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 109 Sst) SRR REESE SOS SE EI PTE DI an ES OSES ESAS AROSE The R. Gokul Family of Isipingo FRI IE HEHE HE IK IK IK Born in the middle of the 19th century in the United Province town of Azamghar, the first of the family arrived here in the seventy’s and settled in the Isipingo area. Un- like the thousands of U.P. immigrants who arrived in this country, Dehloo came here without government assistance and almost immediately began trading in the area. It was the first Indian business in Isipingo and under the name of Dehloo Brothers the firm prospered well into the post- war years. He was an outstanding figure at the “Rail” and the community in the area owe much to him in the field of education and the religious needs of the people were well catered for by his ever ready generosity. The school known as the Isipingo Indian School, isa monument to the HH IK XIE IK IK BK IK IKI IK HEI I I HI BI I BI I HL BB HH BB I A BB HB BB BM BB II I BOI HBB BH BH BB IH HS DJ SS J FJ 3 FEI LIE KEI IK HEA EI x man who donated land and built a school for his people. He was associated with the Mariaman.Temple, giving freely whenever the need arose. He took part in the Gandhi movement and it was he who gave a lavish recep- tion to mark the arrival of Gokhale in 1913. He was well educated in the Vernacular and one of few who knew how to read and write. He visited India on numerous occasions and it was during one such trip that he passed away in his native land in 1917. He left behind three sons and a daughter. His wife never left India — she remained there during the years of her marriage to Dehloo, loathe to leave the land of her birth. IE IE IEE FOE IKE HOE SE NEE HE RE Shortly before Union, the elder of the Goolab’s had already settled in Pretoria and it wasn’t until 1929 that he estab. his first business in Mitchell Street, Pretoria West. The business, then known as G. Bhanabhai, was taken over by his son, Rama Jasmat arrived in this country in 1914 and by 1918 had opened his first business under the name of J. Goolab. He was a public spirited man and was a Past President of the Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj and a Secretary of the Pretoria Branch of the Keradi Bharat Vidyalay of India and Secretary of the Pretoria and District Indian Tailors’ Association. He was educated at Karadi and Navsari. Born in 1902, he died in 1967 at the age of sixty five. TRI IRIE TK IK IE HE REE SE IR BE BA HEHE HEH BB SOE EXE HHL BB BH BE HOEHEHEHE BE BE I I HOEHOEHEHE BL I HE HOE HOEHOEHED IM IH IE IESE I SETI IEE S42 Se PEE ERE REE SS SEI HERE AES nr SENN ge ae er eA IAM The Jasmat Goolab Family of Pretoria FREE MI EI I I GOOLAB, Hira Jasmat: Businessman; b. 13th May, 1926, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Merchant Tailor. Proprietor of H. J. Goolab & Sons. Previously J. Goolab. Other Activities: Past Secretary: Pretoria Indian Tennis Club; Patron: Swaraj F.C.; Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj, Pretoria Branch — Karadi Bharat Vidyalay, Pretoria and District Indian Tailors Association; Rec.: Soccer and Tennis; Travel, India, East African Countries and Rhodesia. Married: Parwathi, daughter of Dhanabhai Nana of Durban; S 2; D 1; Bus. Add.: 480/82 Church Street, Pretoria; Phone: 27167; Res. Add.: 480/82 Church Street, Pretoria; Phone: 27167.

---

## Page 7

110 F-2-2-2-2-$-2-$-5-¢-2-2-4 $58. S22 2-2-2-5-2 2-85.55 5-2:3 R x The Rama Prema Goolab Family of Pretoria We-e-f:t-t°t-¢-2--5-¢-¢- 2.2.3 BA 6 3 HH IEE REE KE ® HEE IK IE EI IE BH HK HH BE HE HE I 3B BB HH A EE BE BK Prema Goolab arrived in this country in 1903, followed by his son, Rama, who settled here in 1918 at the age of seven. The family had already been trading in Pretoria West since 1921 and after his initial training in business methods and practice, he established his own business in 1931 in Pretoria West. In 1941, he took over the parent concern of Rama Goolab, now known as Goolab’s Trading Store. Prema Goolab did not return to South Africa. He died in Karadi, India in 1943. Rama Goolab was born in Karadi, India in 1911. He died in 1952 at the age of forty one. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Se4 GOOLAB, Raman Rama: Busi- nessman; b. 13th February, 1933, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Eldest son of Rama Goolab. Took over family concern of Goolab’s Trading in 1952. Isa member of Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj and the Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj Society — School Board; Married: Maniben, daughter of Jeram Vallabh of De Aar, Cape Province; S 2; D 1; Bus. Add.: 233 Mitchell Street, Pretoria; Phone: 28497; Res. Add.: 285 — 12th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. S44 GOOLAB, Manilal Rama: Des- patch Clerk;b. 28th August, 1940, Pretoria; Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Interested in all social activities; Motor Racing fan. Married; Res. Add.: 285 — 12th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria. GOOLAM, Hoosen Mustapha: Businessman; b. 3rd March, 1941, Nottingham Road, Natal. Educated: Nottingham Road, Sastri College. Son of Goolam Hoosen. Origin: Surat, India. Outstanding Cricketer — rep. P. M. Burg since 1965. Northern Natal — 1965/66/67; Natal — Cape Town, Interprovincial 1968/69. O/Batsman and_ all rounder. H/Score [II. League Tennis — rep. Soccer: Sastri College. Rep. N. Natal High Schools and Natal High Schools, 1958/59; Director: G. Hoosen & Sons; Notts. Agency (Pty.) Ltd. and Hansons Produce (Pty.) Ltd. Activities: Private Secretary: Sastri College F. Club — 1968; Past Member: F.O.S.A. (Howick Branch); Patron: Lions River District Sports Association; Sports: Cricket, Tennis, Soccer and Table Tennis; Married: Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 9, Nottingham Road, Natal; Phone: 19; Res. Add.: Main Road, Nottingham Road, Natal; Phone: 62. S4&e GOOLAM, Mohamed Ismail: B. Commerce — Bombay University, India; b. 1924, Ratnagiri, India. Educated: St. Pauls, Trafalgar High School, Bombay University. Son of Ismail Goolam. Origin: Latvan, Ratnagiri, Bombay. Is one of the leading Indian Businessmen in Cape Town. Founder of Goolams Travel Service 1959. Gold Medalist Advisory Banking. Activities: Is actively interested in various Cultural, Religious and Committee Organisations. Member: Del. — Col. Voters Billl; Travel: U.K., Europe, U.S., Far East, India, Pakistan, M.E. and African territories; Married: Fathima, daughter of Abdul Karrim Saleh of Benoni; Bus. Add.: 19 Wale Street, Cape Town. Phone: 26260; Res. Add.: 23 Wale Street, Cape Town. se) GOORIAH, Puckree: Branch Secretary; b. 11th February, 1927, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Educated: Woodlands and P. M. Burg Technical Institute N.S.C. (Com). Eldest son of V. Gooriah of Pietermaritzburg; Branch Secretary of National Union of Leather Workers since 1954. Attended T.N.C.S.A. — National Conference 1968 (Cape Town) and Johannesburg (1969): Del. to S.A. Federation of Leather Trade Unions; Was Secretary and Chairman: Periods 1954-1969 — Y. Ortmans F. and C.C.; Secretary: Magnus Swimming Club (1965/69); Secretary: Leathers Workers Soccer League 1960/69; Del.: P. M. Burg Boys Scouts Association; Com. Member: T.P.A. Com.; Group Scout Master: Magnus Rover Crew (P. M. Burg — 1960/ 69); Manager: Twinkle Star Childrens Orchestra; Member: Raisethorpe Ratepayers Association; Member: Eddels Sports Club. Outstanding Soccerite — Goalkeeper; Rep. P. M. Burg F.A.; P. M. Burg County F.A. — numerous occasions and Natal (Sam China, 1955); Club: Y. Ortmans (1942/69). Keen on Golf and Tennis; Married: Ambrava- thee, daughter of R. Govender of Mt. Partridge, P..M. Burg; S 1; D 4; Bus. Add.: 533 Longmarket Street, P. M. Burg; Phone: 21529; Res. Add.: 5 Simon Rd., Raisethorpe - Pietermaritzburg, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HE IE HK IE IE HE HEI HA HE BH HL HE BE RE BH HE HE BE HK HE BK BK HE KALB HL HE BEB HEHEHE HHL HOE BH BL HK LIE HE EI BH HEHE HE HL EH HE HEB HE ED HE BOB DE 171 x x : gee x : The Ranchod Goolab Family : 5 of Pretoria x x Ss¢es The pioneer of the Goolab family was Prema Panchia, who was born in Karadi, District Surat, India in 1869 and who arrived in this country in 1902. He landed at East London and made his way to Johannesburg where he spent some time before making a final move to Pretoria. In between visits to India, he’‘traded in both Johannesburg and Pretoria and it wasn’t until 1929 that the present Mitchell Street business was established with all three sons trading as Goolabhai Bhanabhai. The firm of R. Goolab & Sons was established in 1931 in Barber Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria. Ranchod Goolab was a member of the Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj and a member of the Karadi Vidyalay of Karadi, India. One of his sons, Jasmath, still trades under the old family name in Church Street, Pretoria. It was established in 1925. se4 GOOLAB, Parsotam R.: Radio and Electric Engineer; b. 22nd April, 1929, Pretoria, Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Eldest son of Ranchod Goolab. Keen on elec- tronics and radio engineering from an early age. Established P. R. Goolab’s Radio Service, 1962. Other activities: Member: Navyuka Mandal; Hindu Seva Samaj; Travel: India and African countries. Married: Bhanumathi, daughter of Makan Chiba of Karadi, India; $ 1; D 1; Add.: 481 Barber Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 23090. Ss\ GOOLAB, Hiralal R.: Business- man;b, 22nd May, 1931, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Govt. School. Manager of family business — R. Goolab & Sons — since 1966. Other activities: Member: Divine Life Society of South Africa; Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Laudium Bhajan Mandal. Travel: India and African countries. Married: Taramati, daughter of Kanjee Ramjee of Standerton;D 2; Add.: 481 Barber Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 23090. | Pretoria, Phone: 23090. GOOLAB, Jeram R.: Professional Photographer; b. 22nd June, 1935, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Govt. and Pretoria High. Established: Fine Art Studio, 1957. Member: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; Sports: Table Tennisand Cricket. Married: Sabita, daughter of L. Lala of Pretoria; S 2. Bus. Add.: 481/82 Barber Street, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria; Phone: 23090; Res. Add.: 291 10th Avenue, Laudium, Pretoria, Transvaal. $$ 2 GOOLAB, Bhanoo R.: b. 20th February, 1938, Pretoria. Edu.: Pretoria Govt., Pretoria High, Nigel and Jhb. E/A Training College. Qualifications: B.A. and Teacher’s Lower Diploma. Joined teaching profession in 1955. Staff, Pretoria Boys High School. Other activities: Treasurer: Pretoria LC.W. Society; Secretary: Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj. Interests: Travel and Literature; Married: Luxmi, daughter of Manga Jivan of Boksburg; S. 2; D 1. Add.: 481 Barber Street, Asiatic Bazaar,

---

## Page 8

112 233 GOPAL, Ranchodbhai Nagar: Businessman; b. Sth March, 1911, Kacholi, District Surat, India. Educated: Kacholi and Johannesburg Govt. School. Son of Nagar Gopal. Arrived in South Africa in 1919, Entered business scene in 1928 — M. K. Gopal — Family Concern. Activities: Past Member and Foundation Member: Hindu C.C.; Past Chairman, Secretary and now Vice President: Transvaal Darjee Mandal, Past Member: Gandhi Bharat Vidyalaya School (1948/66); Chairman: Billmoria Trust (Johannes- burg). Travel: India; Married: Gajrabhen, daughter of Govind Khusal, Surat, India; S 2; Bus. Add.: 63b De La Rey Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg; Phone: 352800. SS GOPAL, Vassan Nagar: b. 1907, Kacholi, India. Educated: India. Joined family business of N. K. Gopal & Co. (Estab. 1907), at an early age. Launched out on his own in 1919 as National Wholesalers and Distributors. He established other branches under Gopal & Co., Shoe Outfitters and Nargasons Tailors. Public spirited, he is a Trustee of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; Treasurer and Past Chairman: Crematorium Committee. Particularly interested in Social and Welfare work. A Past Member of the N.I.C. He was also connected with the Gandhi Hall building project. Bus. Add.: 63 Delarey Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg; Phone: 35-1225 5 GOSAI, Dayabhai: SG w: b. December, 1928, Bodali, District Nawsari, India. Educated: Bodali, Boksburg Govt. School and Ferrierastown Indian School. Son of Gosai Sooka. Tailoring trade, 1945. Established own business, 1965 — Oxford Tailors & Outfitters; Keen on ail Social and Cultural activities. Is a member of the Transvaal Kori Hithwarduk Mandal. Travel: Toured India 1948 and 1963; African countries; Rhodesia and Mozambique. Sports: Cricket; Married: Shantiben, daughter of Dayal Kanjee; S 1;D 3. Bus, Add.: 6 Kort Street, Johannesburg, Phone: 8343445; Res. Add.: 54 Park Road, Fordsburg, Johannesburg, Transvaal. ssbb GOVENDER, Dorrie, P. D.: Storeman; b. 26th January, 1909 at Stella Hill, Durban. Educated: Stella Hill Govt. Aided Indian School. Son of Late Mr. Maurice Perumal Govender. Entered busi- ness scene, 1950 — Dorries Supply Store & Restaurant. Previously associated with Phillips of Um- komaas. Moved to Woodstock, 1955 ~— opened Dorrie Supply Store same year. Is now I/Store- man at Marconi Marine Co. — Electronics, since 1958. Interested in Religious revival of Hindu Community. Runs Sunday classes — Divine Life Society; Secretary: Divine Life Society since 1959. Is on the Consultative Body of Indian Affairs Department — Cape Town. Activities: Was a Trustee of the Paar! and District THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Rugby Union 1950/55. Previously, Vice President: Alexandra County F/A (Umkomaas); Also W/Trustee of Paarl and Stellenbosch Cricket Union. Was Grantee of Lower Paarl Sports Ground and a Patron of Boland Cycle and Atheletic Union. Acted as judge at various Physical Culture and Beauty Contests in the Cape. Also served as Com. Member: Tamil Educational and Cultural Society (C.T.); Past Chairman: Umkomaas United F. C.; Rec.: P/ Culture and Yoga; Married: Alice, daughter of the Late L. M. Naidoo of Durban;S 1; Bus. Add.: 94 Victoria Road, Woodstock, Cape Province. ssl GOVENDER, Ganese Patchay: School Principal. b. 30th August, 1929, Esperanza, Umzinto Dist., Natal. Educated : Esperanza School and Unisa - B.A. (Hons.); B. Ed.; Son of Patchay Govender of Thiruvarum, Madras, Pres., India. Began teaching career in 1942 as student teacher. Permanent staff in 1946 at Esperanza. Part-time ~ studies UNISA, 1958. Graduated from N.T.S.C., N.T.D. and B.A. | a | (1964). Acting Principal, Espe- ranza, 1961. Acting Principal: N.D. School, 1962. Promoted Principal: E. P. Moodley School, Port Shepstone, 1965. Promoted: Louisnana, 1967. Now teaches at R. A. Engar Memorial. Sports: Keen Sportsman, Active Cricketer. Activities: Committee Member: P. S. Tamil Association; P.S.I.C.W. Society; Chairman: Louisana By-Road Committes; Port Shepstone Hindi Cemetary Association; Port Shepstone School Sports Association as Committee Member; Sec.: Port Shepstone and Dist. Tamil Association; Treasurer : F.O.S.A.; Married: Nora; S 3; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 217, Port Shepstone; Res. Add.: Marburg, Port Shepstone, Ntl. SS¢9 GOVENDER, Govindrajulu, Ruth- num; Sportsman; b. 26th June, 1926. Educated: Thornville June Indian School Methodist (P. M. Burg) and P. M. Burg Technical Institute. Eldest son of Ruthnum of Madras, South India. Versatile Sportsman. One of the few Indian Marathon runners in South Africa (1938/50). Boxing — Amateur ranks in the thirty’s. Played Soccer — Rep. P. M. Burg Junior ranks, Techs., Shamrocks, Stella F.C. Active Cricketer, Stella C.C., Woodlands Old Boys C.C. Was Physical Culture Instructor in the thirty’s. A Member of the Boys Scouts Movement. Also played Golf. Business: Fruit and Vegetable Trade — Govenders Auto Market — Established in 1955. Activities: Vice President: Stella F.C.; Member Committee: Woodlands Old Boys C.C.; Rec.: Music and Angling; Married: Indrani, daughter of N. K. Reddy of Umzinto; S 4;D 2; Bus. Add.: 535 Loop Street, Pietermaritzburg; Phone: 25649; Res. Add.: $35 Loop Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO HEI HK HL HEE HE HE HE HE HEHEHE IH HAH HE HEHE BL HE NE 3 BE BB HB HE HL BE HEEB HH HE HLH HEHE HEHE EE WE HEB BE HB HA LH HL HOE 3 BB BH HE HE EE RED IX FOE I BK FH HK IE I FE HEH HK SK KK & BRIE KE BX HEB KA HEIL HERA EH HE MER EK The Govind Nagar Gopal Family of Johannesburg SH Nagar Gopal joined his brother, Icharam, towards the latter part of the century and by 1903, he had established his first tailoring business in De La Rye Street as M. K. Gopal & Co. This was in partnership with his younger brother, Kalian Gopal. The business was carried on later by Nagar Gopal’s sons at the same address. Public spirited, he was former President and Secretary of the Transvaal Darjee Mandal and Vice President of the Transvaal Hindu Crematorium Committee. He died in Kacholi, India during one of his numerous visits to the homeland. GOPAL, Govind Nagar: Director of Companies. b. 26th October, 1917, Kacholi, India, Educated: Gandevi, India. Arrived in South Africa in 1927. Established J. Nanabhai & Co., 1941, National Wholesalers & Distributors, 1947; Vee-aar Investments, 1951; Also Direct Importers and Distributors. Other activities: Past Secretary: Johannes- burg Hindu Youth League; Hon. Secretary and Committee Member; Treasurer and Auditor: Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; Executive Member and Auditor: Transvaal Darjee Mandal; Comm. Member: Gandhi-Bharat Vidyalaya and Crematorium Comm.; Treasurer: Vrededorp Stailholders and Traders Association; Interests: Indian Music, Literature and ail Sports; Travel: India and African territories. Married: Bhikhiben, daughter of Jivan Govind of Amalia, India; S 4; D 1; Bus. Add.: 40a Market Street, Johannes- burg; Phone: 8385666; Res. Add.: 6-11th Street, Vrede- dorp, Johannesburg; Phone: 352986. SGO S$e| SERRE HK BH HEB HEH BE HEH BNE HB BH BB HEH BR HO BBE HOB BBE BB HEH IH HB BIB BH BO 113 bos-$- 2-8 $-3-$:$-2-5-2- 5-56-53 GOPAL, Navnitlal Govind: Computer Programmer. b. 13th January, 1942, Kacholi, India. Educated: Bree Street, Johannesburg High and Wits University. Eldest son of G. N. Gopal. Director: Vee-aar Investments, National Wholesalers and Distributors; Captain and Chairman: United C. C. and Member of Wits Chess Club; Married: Bhanumati, daughter of Chagan Jina of Springs; Add.: 6-11th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Transvaal. GOPAL, Arun Govind: Director; b. 5th February, 1949, Bilimoria, India. Second son of G. N. Gopal. Is a Director of National Wholesalers & Distributors and J. Nanabhai & Co.; Sports: Cricket, Table Tennis and Chess. Add.: 6-11th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Transvaal. 462 GOPAL, Bhikhiben: Housweife. b. Dhamdachha, India. Wife of Govind Nagar Gopal.

---

## Page 9

114 THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO The Gopaul Family of Fawsley Park. Kearsney Born in the year 1864, the first of the Gopauls arrived in this country in 1888 and settled in the Ifafa area of the South Coast. The arrival here has a romatic twist. In the village where he was born, young Gopaul fell in love with a lovely young maiden and as fate decreed, he had a rival in the matrimonial stakes. There was only one thing to do and that was to flee the village with the result that both the young lovers found themselves at the mercy of an agent recruiting workers who wished to serve on the sugar plantatione.of far away Natal. After weeks on board ship they ‘af last saw the promised land and were attached to a Tea Estate in Ifafa. After their period of indenture they leased a farm where they farmed until 1905, with short stays in Bellair and the Umvoti Mouth. It was here that the family met Colonel Addison with whom Gopaul remained until 1934. They owe much to the humanity and generosity of Colonel Addison. It was after the changeover to another owner that the Gopauls left this area and finally settled at Fawsley Park where the family farms to this day. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO ES -S.2-5.2-2-5.8-2.5.3.2°3 SEE KE EEE BH BH HH HR HE HEH HEI HB HE BE EAE AEE XE IB HE HBL HE HE BOERE XE EN HE HR A KEE XE KE BE of Pretoria Se Born in Gunda. Porbandar District, India in 1892, Jivandas Gordhan Kala arrived in this country in 1905 and settled in Pretoria and established the firm of G. Kala & Co. The firms of N. G. Kala and J. Gordhan & Co. came about in 1939 and 1954 respectively. Together with its subsidiaries, Dominion Plastic Industries, Laudium Industrial Holdings, Universal Lace & Fabrics and Gufrana Lace Mills (Pine- town), the Gordhan family is one of the most progressive in Commerce -and Industry today. J. G. Kala died in Pretoria on the 13th January, 1968 at the age of seventy six. During his lifetime he took a keen interest in every local and home activity. He was a Life Member of the Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj. BRIX SEHK BKB HL AHL IK BH HK HK IK HE EK, 15 BOE HE HEHE HIE HEHE HA HE HK BH HEB HE BE BK KEI HK BER EK HE HEH HE BK HEH HB BH BH BAK HE HE HH BR HE HEH HEB HE LI HE HE HE SH HE The J. Gordhan Family sot GOPAUL, Lutchmansamy: Farmer; b. 25th October, 1900. Educated: Gledhow and Stanger. Joined Gledhow Sugar Estates at sixteen. Was Weigh-bridge Clerk, Storeman. At change-over to White workers who replaced Indians, estab. own farm at Fawsley Park. Established own farm and Trading Store, Now successful farmer in the same area. Was for some time attached to the L. Bodasingh Estates. Grantee: L. Bodasingh School; Chairman: Fawsley Park Indian Society; Melville Indian Mill Group; Committee Member: N.I.C.G.A.; Married: Vijakanthee Naidoo; S 9; D 3; Add.: C/o. L. Bodasingh School, Fawsley Park, P.O. Kearsney, Natal. Ses GORDHAN, Girdharlal Jivandas: Director of Companies. b. 12th November, 1913 at Pretoria. Eldest son of J. Gordhan of Gunda, Kathiawad and Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Primary. Died in 1957 at Porbandar, India. S06 GORDHAN, Late Samji Jivan: b, 22nd == April, 1922, Gunda, Kathiawad. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Married: Saguna, daughter of Madhavdas Kurjee; S 4;D 2. Died 13th Sept,, 1969 in India. $12 S6 GORDHAN, Heralal Jivan: Director of Companies; b. 30th November, 1931, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Third son of J. Gordhan, st} GORDHAN, Late Shantilal Gird- harlal. Director of Companies. b. 12th October, 1932, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Eldest son of Girdharlal Jivandas of Pretoria. Sce GOPAUL, Venngopaul: School Principal, Glenville Indian School. Eldest son of L. Gopaul. S6G GOPAUL, Vijakantee: Housewife; Wife of Lutchmansamy Gopaul of Fawsley Park. GORDHAN, Arvindkumar Girdharlal: Director of Com- panies. b. 8th December, 1935, Pretoria. Educated: Pretoria Indian High School. Second son of Girdharlal Jivandas of Pretoria.

---

## Page 10

116 The A. N. Goshalia Family of Durban $13 GOSHALIA, Ramniklal A.: Direc- tor of Companies; b. Rangoon, Burma in 1914. Educated: Marine College and Alfred High School, Rajkot, India. Eldest son of A. N. Goshalia of Durban. Chairman and Director: Group of Companies: Goshalia Holdings (Pty.) Ltd.; Naaz Cinema, Natraj Cinema (Pty.) Ltd., Merwent Properties (Pty.) Ltd. Developers of one of the largest Indian Commercial Complexes in the country; Sparks Film Dists. (Pty.) Ltd., Simsley Invests. (Pty.) Ltd.; Chatsworth Twin City Cinema project; Disc-Curios (Pty.) Ltd. The Group is now developing a T.V. departments which will cater especially for the taste of Indian viewers in the Republic. Has travelled widely, throughout the U.K., Europe, M.E., U.S.A. and African countries. Interested in all local and external activities — Sports: Tennis; Married: Shanta, daughter of Mulchand Jadavjee of India; S 1;D 1. Bus. Add.: 64 Victoria Street, Durban; P. O. Box 1756; Phone: 67340; Res. Add.: 105 Victoria Street, Durban; Phone: 20377. S14 GOSHALIA, Shanta: Housewife Born Gondal, India, daughter of Mulchand Jadavjee. Educated: Gondal High School for Girls. Wife of R. A. Goshalia. Takes a keen interest in women’s activities. THE fat islets oe WHO'S WHO 7 Born in Rajkot, Kathiawad, India in 1885, Amulakh N. Goshalia arrived in this country in 1905S. Pioneer in the field of Indian film imports, he was the first Indian to introduce Indian drama and live shows into this country. A fine Musician, he was also instrumental in ‘teaching and fostering Indian Music in Durban and was an Honorary Gujarati Teacher in P. M. Burg and Durban for many years. In 1938, Mayville Theatre came into the forefront as a focal point for the introduction into this country of good Indian film fare and it was here that the beginnings of the Goshalia entry into the film import business began. From this humble beginning it has grown into a giant which will soon make inroads into the T.V. world which is soon to be introduced here. Away from the film business and _ its preoccupation, A. N. Goshalia found time to join Social, Cultural and Religious activities. In his early days he had joined whole-heartedly in the Congress movement and during the Passive Resistance campaign led by Mahatma Gandhi, he was one of those not found wanting when the call came. He wasa close associate of Swami Shankeranand and was responsible for the inauguration of M. K. Gandhi’s birthday celebrations in this country. Died: 4th December, 1952. S16 GOSHALIA, Naval: b. India, 1892. Educated: Khakhijalia Gujarati School. Eldest daughter of E. D. Batavia. Wife of A. N. Goshalia. Died: 4th February, - 1961. sv) GOSHALIA, Mahendra Rai: b. 1937. Educated: Sastri College, Durban. Eldest son of R.A. Goshalia. Director of Companies, Goshalia Group. Member: Kathia- wad Youth Organisation; Rec.: Tennis; Married: Prabha, daughter of Damjee S. Vather. Travel: U.K., Europe, U.S.A., India, M.E., Far East and African countries. Res. Add.: 130 Natraj Centre, Mere- bank (Bombay Walk). THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO 117 ESE SED PEAR SID RNP AOR ae Pe nS en WEEE ERE MK S1E GOVENDER, Ganesh Edlepen: Transport Operator; b. 26th October, 1926, Educated: Greenwood Park Indian School. Joined firm of Pyott’s, Biscuit Makers, at an early age. In 1958, established E. G. Govender — Cartage Con- tractors and Furniture Removers, Operated fleet of trucks by 1962. One of leading contracting businesses in the Greenwood Park area; Married: Maganagyee, daughter of M. K. Govender of Inanda; S 2; D 2; Bus. and Res. Add.: 11 Workington Avenue, Greenwood Park, Durban, Phone: 834429. The E. G. Govender Family of Greenwood Park HERE E I TEI HE BENE MEI BH BD MH BE HEME HEH BBE I HOH ED ME BL EKER BS DJ I SS 9 I SRE EEE EMER EE EE The first arrival of ‘this branch of the Govenders, Chinnia, settled in the Greenwood Park area in the eighty’s and was contracted to the Brick & Tile Works which was then in operation there. After serving his period of indenture, he began fruit farming and market produce. He died in 1946. Of the three children, the youngest a son, began life under the shadow of poverty. At an early age he was already working on the farm and much later, after he had seen service in various occupations, he retired in 1947. Ellepen Govender’s third son, Ganesh was born in 1926. $14 GOVENDER, Peritam, Moonsamy: Dry Cleaner; b. 15th May, 1914 at Benoni, Transvaal. Educated: Benoni I. C. Govt. School. Son of Peritam Govender. Origin: Chittor, Madras. Was previously in taxi business from 1939. Estab. Target Cleaners & Dyers, 1948. One of leading firms of its kind in the East Rand. Pres. Premises opened by the Mayor of Benoni, Mrs. N. Mc Dowel on 10th July, 1955. Takes a keen interest in all local Charitable, Cultural and Social Activities. Other Activities: Treasurer: Benoni Tamil School Board; Vice President: Benoni Hindi Maha Sabha; Patron: B. Child Welfare Society; Patron/Founder: Berea Park C.C.; Married: Thayarammah, daughter of C. Mari- paw of Benoni; S 1; D 6; Bus. Add.: 534, Govender St., Actionville; Phone: 546207. (Ext. 2 — Benoni); Res, Add.: 534 — Govender Street, Actonville, sso GOVENDER, Govindsamy, Sadiappa: Draughtsman. (Architectural). b. 24th July, 1941, Pietermaritzburg, Educated: Woodlands High School and M. L. Sultan Technical College, Pietermaritzburg. Son of Late Sadiappa Govender of Pietermaritzburg (Foundation Member of T.P.A.). Origin: Madras, Presidency, India. Is an Archi- tectural Draughtsman. Passed Advanced Technical Course. Runs Drawing office in City Centre (Indian Area). Acts.: Was connected with R. N. Fowler (Dip. Arch. Sheffield). Member: Pietermaritzburg Indian C. W. Society (Pentrich Branch); Member: New Age Social Club. Active League Cricketer — Royals C. C.; Rep. P. M. Burg Indian District Cricket, 1965/66; League Table Tennis — Northern Natal League New Age Table Tennis Club. Public Spirited. Bus. Add,: 3 Medina Blds., 480 Church Street, P. M. Burg; Phone: 20690; Res. Add.: 39 Bodnim Road, Allendale. Ss) GOVENDER, Nadasen (Harry): Restauranteur; b. 7th July, 1912 at Mt. Moreland, Verulam. Educated: Verulam Govt. Indian School. Son of Velloo Govender of Mt. Moreland, Verulam, Natal and Velloor, Madras Presidency, India. Proprietor of flourishing Cafe & Restaurant in Verulam town centre. Established in 1953, is a well- known haunt for visiting and local sportsman. Activities: Takes interest in all Sports, Social, Religious matters. Member: Verulam Hindu Cemetery Society; Verulam Ratepayers Association; Rec.: Soccer, Cricket, Fishing, Music; Married: Subbama Moodley of Verulam; S 4;D 2. Bus. Add.: 25 Moss Street, Verulam; Phone: 99; Res. Add.: 1 Kolwa Road, Mission Station, Verulam; Phone: 68.

---

## Page 11

118 S32 The M. C. -Govender Family Born in 1868 in. Kodukuppen, South Arcot, India, Chinnia Govender arrived here at the age of twenty two and settled in the Greytown area where he was attached to the Ottermann family who were then farming in the pre- dominantly German occupied farming area of the Natal midiands. He served the family for close on to fifteen years and in 1905, moved to Pietermaritzburg. He saw service with the Maritzburg College for over forty years. He died in India in 1952 at the age of eigtity four. Sod GOVENDER, Muniswami, C.: b. 15th December, 1912, Greytown. Educated: York Road Govt. School, Pietermaritzburg. Eldest son of C. Govender. Leather Worker. Joined Leather Workers in 1927; Shop Steward in 1960. Represents workers since then. Committee Member: N.U.L.W.; Was at one period with the S.A.P. (1942/47). Other Activities: Vice Chairman: Eddel’s Sports & Social Club; Chairman: I.C.W.S. (Raise- thorpe); Council Member: Siva Soobramany and Mariaman Temple; Committee Member: F.O.S.A.; Priest-in-Charge: Sova Sithanta Sungum; Secretary: Drakes F.C.; Committee Member: Raisethorpe Arya Samaj; Member: Raisethorpe THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO Ratepayers Association; Chairman: Raisethorpe Angler’s Club; Committee Member: Woodlands Parent/Teacher’s Association; Rec.: Music and Horticulture; Married: Thoolsuammah, daughter of R. K. Naidoo of P. M. Burg; S 3; D 6; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 55S, Pietermaritzburg; Phone: 28111; Res. Add.: 30 Manuel Road, Raisethorpe, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Sey GOVENDER, Gopal, Muniswami: School Teacher; b. 11th June, 1939, Pietermaritzburg. Educated: St. Pauls; Woodlands, (High); Springfield Training College. 3rd year B.A. (Ext.); Son of Muni- swami Govender. Joined teaching profession in 1961, at New Han- ~ over. Taught at various N.E.D, a schools throughout the Province. Recipient of Metcalf Memorial Bursary, Merit Award Training College for General Achievement, Appointed Lecturer: New Arith- metic, by Department of Indian Affairs — 1969. Other Activities: President: Harts F.C., Club Milano Social Club, Northdale Social Club (first President); Foundation Member: Lotus Badminton Club, was foundation Member: Northdale F.A., Foundation Member and First President: New Hope Social Club; Played for Thistles F.C. Joined Professional ranks, Maritzburg United F.C. (1963); First Rep. N. Natal vs S. Natal, 1962. Rep. Natal High Schools XI — Transvaal, 1960. Plays Badminton, Tennis (Lotus Club), Cricket; Married: Helen Gaskin; S 1; > eS \ nas The Govenders of Groutville The exact date of the arrival of Perumal Govender is not known. He was one of the early Indians under indenture amongst those who arrived in the 60’s..After some period of indenture with various estates on the North Coast he leased a farm in the Frasers area where he farmed until 1940, the year of his death. He was born in Palur Madras, India in 1848. ses ’ GOVENDER, Narayansamy: Cane Farmer; b. 13th Aug., 1921, Frasers. Educated Fairbreeze School. Son of Perumal Govender, Farming in the Groutville area. Chairman: Maryaman Temple (Groutville); Parent/Teachers Associa- tion; Cent. Comm. Mem. and Executive: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association; Member: Shakaskraal Indian Mill Group; Committee Member: Indian Mill Group; Married: § 2; D 1; Add.: P. O. Groutville, Natal; Phone: 1412. SS GOVENDER, Kisten: Cane Farmer: b. 1918; Educated: Fairbreeze School. Son of Perumal Govender of Frasers. Farming in Groutville as Kisten and Narayansamy — Partners. Member: Natal Indian Cane Growers Association, Rec.: Angling; Married: S 2; D 3; Add.: P. O. Groutville, Natal; Phone: 1412. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 119 se-] GOVENDER, Rathanum Aya- kannu; Businessman; Commission- er of Oaths; b. 1918, Umzinto. Educated: St. Patricks School, Umzinto. Son of Late Mr. and Mrs. M. A. Govender; Origin: Nilaghizi, Madras Pres., South India. Leading social worker and businessman of Umzinto — popularly known as “R.A.” Belongs to various Social, Cultural and Sports bodies. Acts.: Executive Member: Natal Council for Childwelfare ;Chairman: Indian C. W. Society; L/Trustee and Treasurer: Umzinto — Vishnu Tempie; lrustee and Treasurer: Indian Education Trust; Executive Member: Soil Festival Com.; Chairman: Divine Life Society; Vice Chairman: Umzinto Indian Traders Association; Chairman: Umzinto Indian Ratepayers Asso.; Vice Chairman: Umzinto Indian Lawn Tennis Association; Patron: Various sports Clubs and Associations; Chairman: Umzinto S. A. Indian School Educational Committee; Member: South African Indian Council; Travel: Visited {ndia, Kashmir and Ceylon during 1963/64. Met leading Members of Govt. Toured U.K., the Continent and the Scandinavian countries during 1967; Sports: Was active Sportsman, Soccer and Tennis; Rec,: Motoring and Litera- ture; Married: M. Govindama, eldest daughter of Poonsamy Padayachee of Pietermaritzburg; S 2;D 2; Add.: P.O. Box 29; Phone: 32; Umzinto, Natal. GOVENDER, Shunmeesnd Alimuthu: — Professional Photographer; b. 30th December, 1939, Redcliff, Verulam, Natal. Educated: Wyld Memorial and Verulam High School. Son of Alimuthu Govender of Inanda, Natal, Proprietor of Govender’s Photographic Service, Stanger. Student of Cleaverhume (British) College for Photography. Moved to Stanger in 1962. Opened Photographic business in October, 1964. Rec.: Darts, Fishing, Camping and Photography; Bus. Add.: 17 Reynolds Street, Stanger — Phone: 19 Stanger; Res. Add.: Seaview Road, Stanger. Sai GOVENDER, Vingedajalem Peter: Businessman; b. 18th July, 1923, Bloemhof, Transvaal. Educated: Sophiatown R. C. School. Son of Mariemuthoo Govender. Origin: Madras Presidency, India. Began life early in 1938. Estab. first business — V. Govender — 1943. Is a Director of of several Companies. One of leading Tamil Members of the Community. Is concerned with the planning and uplifting of the Indian Community. Activities: Chairman in other capacities of various public bodies, Lenasia Cham- ber of Commerce, Lenasia Cons. Com., L.C.C. — Planning Com.;F/M: Wanderers C.C. (Lenasia): Patron of numerous other sporting bodies; Member: First Primary School Educational Committee — Lenasia; Vice President: Melrose Siva Soobranarian Temple; Treasurer: Lenasia Tamil Asso.; Nominated member of the South African Indian Council, 1968; Sports: Cricket and Tennis; Married: Neela, daughter of S. Pillay of Pretoria; S 1;D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 11, Lenasia; Phone: 5; Res. Add.: 50 - 12th Street, Lenasia; Phone: 7. SEB GOVENDER, Subramoney, Abbu: Cinema Owner and Director of Companies; Born 16th February, 1928, Tinely Manor, Lower Tugela District. Educated: Fairbreeze Govt. Aided Indian School. Son * * of Late Abbu Govender of Sand- fields, Maidstone and Madras Presidency, India. Proprietor of —a Pe 4 large and up-to-date Cinema in centre of Verulam. Also runs Land ; and Estate business in Tongaat and X Verulam Insurance agent for S.A. Eagle Star Group and A.A. Mutual Associated Company; Activities: Member: Verulam Indian Child Welfare Society; Patron: Verulam Clinic Board, Mitchell C.C., Tongaat; Member: Verulam and Tongaat Ratepayers Association; Treasurer for Tongaat Indian Traders Association. Was appointed Alternate Member: Verulam Licensing Board. Takes keen interest in all Social, Religious and Educational matters, Supports all Local and National charities. Rec.: Angling, Treasurer: Victoria Angling Club; Married: Thavagie Naidoo of Clairwood, Durban; S 2; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 175, Phone: 166 M. Tongaat: Res. Add.: Main Road, Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Natal; Phone: 126. S340 GOVENDER, Shanumgam Pat- chappa: Garage Owner; b. 27th July, 1921, Pietermaritzburg; Educated: Woodlands Indian School, Pietermaritzburg; Son of Patchappa Govender of P. M. Burg : and Madras Presidency, India. R =, Garage Owner Govender’s essa Garage — P. M. Burg. Estab. 1960. is Holds Diplomas in Radio ‘= \ Engineering and Welding. Holly- wood Radio and Television (U.S.) ~ W * and Union College, respectively. Is 2 a keen student of astrology from early age. Was associated with Cyclone Gate and Fence for twenty three years as a Welder. Keen Deep-Sea Angler. Interested in all sports. Keen Swimmer. Public Spirited — contributes to various causes; Director: Govender’sGarage (Estab. 1960); Married: Senmuthi, daughter of A. A. Moodley of Pietermaritzburg S 3; D 3; Bus. Add.: 550 Berg Street, P. M. Burg; Phone: 20415; Res. Add.: 550 Berg Street, P. M. Burg; Phone: 20415. 72. GUDAR, B. (Bhadersen): Businessman; {Sth September, 1921, Tongaat, Natal. Educated: Richmond and Suther- lands (P. M. Burg); Son of Tommy Gudar of Richmond. Well-known figure in local business circles. Pioneer in Wicker and Cane products amongst Indians in Republic (Established in 1940). Also owns Transport (Passenger) Bus and runs Mobile Shop in Richmond area, originally established by T, Gudar in 1940. Interested in all matters affecting community; Rec.: Literature and Music. Married: Rookmin, daughter of Badree of Clairwood, Durban. Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 40, Richmond; Phone: 76; Res. Add.: Main Road, Richmond, Natal.

---

## Page 12

120 HE EERE IRIE IE EEE I HE HE HEH x HR SE HE HE HE HE HK EH EEE, LOLOL DEBE DI TI MO THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO'S WHO SITE I III DRE BA BADD BB III HERE HE FR ILHK HEHE II I I HEH I The 8. S. Govender Family of Inanda One of the most resourceful of the Govenders to arrive in this country was Murugappa Govender who settled here as early as 1874. After some years he returned to India in the eighty’s and seemed to have persuaded a number of his kinsmen to settle here as over sixty of the Govender clan arrived with him and made the Newlands area their home while a few settled elsewhere along the coast. Besides farming in beetal leaves and other greens he also operated a transport business and undertook ploughing operations for local farmers. He was one of the first of the immigrants to establish a school for his people. He was a remarkable man in many ways and left an indelible imprint on the history of early Inanda and Newlands. He was born near Arcot, Madras Presidency, India in 1856 and died in 1906 at the age of fifty. <=A3 GOVENDER, Subrayan: Farmer and Transport Operator. b. 1887. Third son of M. Govender. Began farming at an early age. Moved to Inanda in 1917 where family settled on 565 acre farm. General Manager of family farm. Family unit split in 1941. Two sons of Subrayan Govender began farming at Phoenix and Groenberg, working independently. Subrayan began farming at Greenhill at this stage. say GOVENDER, Somasundrum: Farmer and Bus Operator; b. 1913 at Newlands. Educated: Mitchell Crescent and Inanda Indian School. Eldest son of S. M. Govender. Farming at Phoenix. Also runs successful Bus Business as Govender’s Express & Retail Bus under S. S. Govender. Activities: Member: Natal Cane Grower’s Association; Treasurer: Natal Estates Indian Mill Group; Grantee: Wyld Memorial Indian School. Is a keen supporter of every €ultural, Religious, Educational and Social activities in the district; Married: Kogilamba, daughter of T. A. Govender of Durban; S 3; D 2; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 55, Red Hill, Durban; Res. Add.: Groenberg Farm, Inanda; HE YEE HET BR HE HOE HEB I IE HE HEB HE IE FE HLEIE HEIL IE ITA IB II SPN BB EI TEE EE NE SE MEE EK Phone: 4M Inanda. AS GOVENDER, Comarsamy S.: Farmer: b. 1918, Newlands. Educated: Primary School, Inanda. Farmer; Bus Owner. Connected over the years with the Gangamman Temple, Inanda and Natal Estates Indian Mill Group. Director: Phoenix/Inanda Transport Co. Interested in all other local activities. over the years; Married: Papma, daughter of Sola Govender of Upper Inanda; S 2;D 3. THE SOUTHERN AFRICA INDIAN WHO’S WHO 12] The C. Perumal Govender Family of Inanda S16 GOVENDER, Kista Perumal: Farm Manager; b. 25th May, 1925, Inanda. Educated: Wyld Memorial Activities: Committee Member: Nata! Estates Indian Mill Group; N. E, Group Development Board; Wyld Memorial S. A. School. Married: S 2; D 2; Interests: Motoring and Travel; Bus. Add.: P. O. Box 106, Verulam, Natal. Phone: 2003; Res. Add.: Groen- berg Farm, Inanda. The family came to this country from Vallore, Madras, India, settling here during the Boer War. It was with the Willikson Estate at Mount Edgecombe that the family served its indenture. It was not unusual for whole families to be attached to individual estates in those days. They moved to Inanda where the E. M. Paruk family had a Tea Estate. After some time with a Wattle Company in the area the family took over a twenty acre farm in Upper Inanda and began banana and cane farming in the area. The second son of Chinnia Govender, Perumal, took over an adjoining farm and began farming here and by 1941, was joined by his eldest son, Kista. Under his managership, the farm has become one of the best known enterprises in the Inanda district. It included a Cartage Contracting business and includes interests in the New Glasgow and Frasers areas. $77 GANDHI, Anandlal Shamaldas. Director of Co’s. Edu: Alfred High - Rajkot, Bhavsingee High & Rashtriyashala, India. Son of Anandlal Amratlal & grand - nephew of Mahatma Gandhi (1905). Arrived in S.A. in 1934 after a period of study in India. Joined staff of Indian newspaper “Indian Opinion” the same year. Left services of paper in 1937. Estab. own bus. as S.A. Gandhi, in Pine St. in 1939. Has developed the firm into one of the leading fancy goods concerns in Durban arid importers of fire- works. Other activities:- Treasurer: Isipingo Beach Hindu Society; Mem.: Kathiawad Hindu Seva Samaj; Life Mem.: Modh Mahadaya - Bhavnagar, India. Was at one time General Manager of the “Indian Opinion.” Patron.: Isipingo Beach Citizens’ Asso. Contributes to various charitable orgs. Donor - Ambulance - Phoenix Settlement Trust. Also connected with township development in- terests in Natal. Director, S.A. Gandhi & Co., Gifts & Fireworks Wholesalers, Seahaven Private Hotel, and various subsidiary Co’s. in the property, investment & commercial fields. M: $.3 D.2. D.2. Bus: Add.: 371 Pine St., Dbn. Phone: 64327. Res: 18 Bellevue Rd., Isipingo Beach, Ntl. Phone: 91313. Cable & Tel.: Fireworks. P.O. Box 96 & 189. Dbn.

---

