# South African Indian Who's Who (1940)

**Book ID:** whos-who-1940-pt7
**Total Pages:** 7

---

## Page 1

344 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO Yoouranaursagueranescvssvevseusssuers sor sesnvensearmansasnousanad couse ssapnrsansnacen suunes SUSE Dsnuneuneuscasaasaeannsvenag S4rer re eus raepracuersecadeusuereasssenersnned senses gany Indian CGAbo Gas Mbo “ Gell it to the Generation Following ” ABDOOLA Amod, former merchant; 6. Jodiya,dist. Jamnagar, Kathiwar; came to South. Africa in’ the early dys Traded in Northern Nata] and Transvaal; opened own business as gen- eral dealer at Amster- dam, Transvaal. Died at Durban. Survived by widow and several sons and daughters who are resident at Piet Retief, Transvaal. AYOB, Noor Ma- homed; &. Ranavav, Kathiwar, India, 1865; six s., three d.; educ. Ranavav. Came to South Africa in 1887, landing at Durban, and, after short stay in Natal, went to Basutoland, eventually settled in Pretoria, where he started own business as merchant. Later on opened branch in Johannes- burg; was conducting large wholesale busi- ness with head office at Pretoria at the time of his death; was also a large property owner. Left an estate of £120,000. Public activies : Was first Indian to acquire immovable property in the name of a company in the Transvaal, forming the first company known as The Land & Trading Co., Ltd. Was a former secty. and a hfe trustee of the Pretoria Mohammedan Congregation ; v-presdt., Transvaal Memon Assocn. ; life-trustee, Pretoria Memon Assocn. Educational Trust. Had been a generous donor to all deserving funds, including the Governor-Genera]’s Fund, Turkish Mosque lund, and educational and public funds. Had earmarked a sum of £4,500 for an Indian school in Pretoria. Died Pretoria, Aug. 7, 1935. BAYAT, Amod: 6. Varacha. about 1859; died at Pietermaritz- burg, 1931. On leaving India went to Mauri- tius where he resided for about ten years. Proceeding to Natal, hete was in private employment, then started own business in Maritzburg; was con- nected with it prac- tically until the time of his death. Public actreities Wasa keen public worker from the very early days. Took a prominent part in the life of the community: a foundation member of the N.LC,; a member of the deputation to England in 1909, to protest against the then licensing law of 1896; was a member of the South African Indian deputation to India in connection with the Class Areas Bill; founder of Surat Suni Mosque and Madressa,P.M.Burg, BAYAT, Ismail Eb- rahim; 64. Surat, India, 1871; died, Wurban, May I, 1932. First landed Durban, 1886. Proceeded to the Trans- vaal ; after a short stay, returned to Natal, entering business with his cousin, Dawood Ma- homed Bayat, at Dun- dee, 1890. Transferred interests to Maritzburg, entered into partner- ship in the firm of his brother, Amod Bayat, 47, Church St., opened branch in Durban, 1917. Public work: Presdt. and a trustee of the Mohammedan Mosque and Madressa, Maritzburg. up to the time of his death: one of the founders of the Mohamedan Oriental School, for which he collected funds. adding a hostel and was responsible for bringing out teachers from India, 1918: secty., Madressa Anjuman Islam, and West St. Mohamedan Mosque, Durban, up to the time of his death; secty., Mota Varachha ‘Trust Fund, Natal Branch; was chairman, Natal Indian Merchants’ Assocn. Is survived by a widow, four sons (Abdul Kader, Dawood, Cassim and Mahomed) and three daughters. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 345 BHABHA, Amod Essop; 6. Iholvad, dist., Surat, 1865; died, July 10, 1933. Came to South Africa in 1888, being one of the pioneer Indian merchants Settled in Middleburg, where he conducted general dealer's business for 35 years. Was one of the leading Indians in district, being respected by all sections of the community. On_ his death, the AMfiddleburg Observer wrote: “It Mr. Bhabha had any faults—if one can call it a fault—it was his extreme generosity. He was highly respected by all the old Middleburgers who knew him. No call for charity or for the promotion of the town was ever turned down by the late A. E. Bhabha.” He was one of advanced outlook and devoted all ‘his spare time to the study of English literature, politics, economics and religious subjects. He communicated his interest in these subjects to his children, While a devoted Muslim, he was a good Indian and his acts of generosity and benevolence touched all sections of the community. He took part in the passive resistance movement under Mr. Gandhi, serving a term of imprisonment. The water supply of Mr. Bhabha’s native town, Kholvad, in the Surat district, is derived from the ground given in charity by him. BILLIMORIA, Am- baram Lalloo; also known as Motiram Morar ; 6. Bilimora, 1897; educ. Bilimora ; came to South Africa, 1910; settled in Nigel, Transvaal; then went to Springs, being at periods, in Benoni, Boksburg, Germiston, Johannesburg, Roode- poort and Krugersdor), Started business as merchant tailor in 1915; prior to this was in father’s business. Public work; Presdt. of Transvaal Dargi Mundal; secty., Hindu Dharma Sabha Krugersdorp ; former secty., Krugersdorp Indian Community. Had been connected with public hfe since carly davs, being a boy when associated with Mahatma Gandhi, staying at the Tolstoy farm; repsd. Transvaal at S.A.LC. Conferences, Kimberley, 1928 and Cape Town, 1930. Always took Jeading part in all public affairs both in South Africa and in India. Died in India, 1937. BOBAT, Hajee Is- mail Mahomed ; was Commissioner ‘oz Oaths, Durban; 6. Kathor, India, 1880; educ. Kathor. In 1892 came to South Africa and joined the firm of his uncle, Hajee Da- wood Mahomed. In 1903 one of the founders and partners in the firm of B. Ebrahim, Ismail & Co., wholesale merchants, at one time the leading Indian business firm in Natal. Also director and chairman of the Kathorian Trading Co. (Pty.), Ltd. Was principal Indian representative of the London and Lancashire Insurance Co. Public work - Was chairman, Indian Chamber of Commerce, one of those respensible for compiling valuable infermation contained in The indian Trader, a statement submitted to the Sir Farl-i Hussain Delegation. Was actively engaged in all affairs of the Indian community, and had a pro- gressive outlook. Highly respected by all sections of the community. Was presdt., Orient Club, Isipingo. In India founded the Mehfile Ronakul Islam—the Charitable Zanana Dispensary—at Kathor. Made pilgrimage to Mecca, 1936. Died Mauritius, Feb. 2, 1939; survived by widow, one s.. two d. BODASING, Bas- daw Singh; 6. New Guelderland, 1893; 3rd s. of late Babu Bodasing ; two s., three d.; educ. Higher Grade Government Indian School, Durban. Was one of the leading Indian cane planters in Natal. Once played cricket and soccer. V.-presdt., North Coast Indian Football <A\ssocn. ; presented, jointly with brothers L. KR. and N., the Bodasing Memorial Cup, the premier soccer trophy fer the North Coast. V.-presdt, Stanger Hindi School. Was treas., > Guelderland Mtl Group ; was presdt., Arva Prithnidi Sabha; donor Currie’s Fountain Ground Clock. Visited India, 1932-33, met many eminent Indians. Died 1939. z

---

## Page 2

346 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO BRAMDAW, Dabee, retired civil servant; five s., three ad: b. ) Pictermaritzburg, Nov. 5, (881; educ. One of the few Indians of the Province who had the benefit of being ed- ucated at a European school, namely, the Boys’ Model School, P.M.B. Private study thereafter. Passed Union Lower Law Exam. Managing clerk in legalvoffices. Ad- mitted Sworn Trans- lator ef the Supreme Court of S.A. Joined Civil Service July 13, 1913, and served in Courts of Magistrates for districts of Umlazi, Verulam, Bulwer, Stanger and Pinetown. Acted as Clerk to Returning Officer for Provincial Council and Legislative Assembly elections, as Clerk of Court, and served as Clerk to Rural Licensing Board. Specially appointed by Govt. to give evidence before the Graham Commission (Public Service’. Author of the official report to Govt. on the Indian strike at Verulam and district, 1913. Invited to draft Rural Licensing Board regula- tions. Except for sitting on the Bench has performed all work within the jurisdiction of a Magistrate’s court in the administration of justice and public affairs, Public service» Led severe) deputations to Education Dept., and instrumental in establishing several Govt. schools at Stanger and Pinetown: with others, established first Arya Samaj in South Africa. In Sport: Introduced Five-a-side competition among Indians in Natal; Life v.-presdt., MADILEIAL First Indian to pacs referee's examination, conducted by Officia's of the M.D.F.A. (European). Died Durban, Oct, 26, 1935. CHOONOO, John; 6. in Gaya, India and when quite young went to Mauritius, where for several years served as a Catechist under the Church Missionary Society. He married in Mauritius and there his wife predeceased him, leaving 4 children. He married again and left for Natal in Sect- ember, 1880. In 1882 he began his mission- ary career under the Wesleyan Methodist Church of South Africa which he served for 42 years without a break. His activities extended on the coast belt of Natal, where he helped to build a number of churches and Indian schools. ‘Two of his sons, Reuben and Arthur, are Methodist ministers. and three others, Timothy, Ezekiel and Walter, are head teachers of Government-Aided schools at Verulam, Tongaat and Prospect-Halt respectively. He died at the age of 95 vears on Easter Sunday, April 20, 1924. His wife died 3 months later on July 27, 1924, CACHALIA, Ahmed Mahomed ; chairman of the Transvaal British [netian Assocn, one of the staunchest Passive Resistance leaders. He served periods of imprison- ment and allowed him- self to be made insol- vent rather than violate his oath, sub- sequently paying his creditors in full, DAHYA Naran; 0. Navasari, Bombay Presidency, ¢. 1888: educ. Navasari, €. s. of late Naran Moolchand. Came out to Natal as a youngster, stayed in various parts of Natal, gaining experience in trade of this country. Returned to India; coming ont again in 1913, when established successful business at Mayville. Publsec ac- fivittes > Was inter- ested in all activities of the community; Member, Surat Hindu Assocn. and Natal Indian Congress. Traded at 120, Main Road, Mayville, Durban. Died, April 18, 1936. Survived by widow, three s., four 4. DAWOOD, Ma- homed, merchant and leader. One of the out- standing leaders of the Indian community. Died in Natal. DEWAN, K. R.; d. Hyderabad Sind, Cct. 6, 1939, DALA, Mahomed Ismail ; 6. P. Tatnow, Burma, 1874; 9 educ. Kathor. In 1887 went to Mauritius, where en- gaged first in store- keeping. In 1890 came to Natal, settling in Dundee. After two years’ private emplov- ment,opened own bust- ness as general dealer in Dundee, Natal. In 1895 left for Cape ‘Town. Since then had been engaged in busi- ness as general dealer (draper, grocer, etc.), till his death. MKeenly interested in education ; son had qualified in medicine from Liverpool and London Universities Another three daughters and one son are engaged in his former business at 21-27, Hanover Street, Capetown. Visited England and Continent in 1928. Died at Capetown, 1938 EBRAHIM, Ma- homed (of the firm of M. Ebrahim Soondka, Ltd.) ; b. Ranavav, 1882; educ. Ranavay. Came to South Africa in 1912, setthng in Pretoria. First was partner in brother's business in name of XN. M. Ebrahim, but resigned in order to start own business under name of M. Ebrahim Soondka, wholesale merchants and direct importers. A quiet worker in the cause of the community. Died in India, 1934. GANESS, Aympa- rumal Moodley; 6. Rosehill, Mauritius, 1887 ; educ. Mauritius ; y. »s. of late Ayna Moodley. Came to South Africa in 1901, settled in Port Kliza- beth, where started business as fish dealer, which he had developed on a large scale. Owned a fleet of four motor boats for fishing. Traded in own name of A. Ganess, wholesale and retail fish mer- chants. Public activa- ties : Was member of the Cape Indian Congress (Port Elizabeth Branch) ; member of the Siva Soobramanium Hindu Temple ; committee member of the Saraswati Educational Institute, Port Elizabeth. Died at Port Elizabeth, 1938 THE SOUTH AFRICAN WHO'S WHO 347 GANI, Abdool Reh- man, Abdool ; hy, Vadashda, Kathiwar, 1885; educ. Vadashda; four s., two d. Came to South Africa in 1898, stayed first at Potch- efstroom, with grand- father Hajee Seley Mahomed—and joined in father’s business, trading as A. G. HLS. Mahomed and Sons. When father returned to India in I91f4 re- tiring from business, took over entire con- trol, changing firm name to A. R. A. Gani. Returned to India, 1925, coming back 1927. In 1930 removed to Klerksdorp and opened biggest Indian firm there, carrying on in firm name of Gani’s Bombay House. This business had branches in India—-Ismail Abdool Rehman and Co., Mopla Buildings, first floor, Abdool Rehman St.. Bombav : at Vizianagram, India. trading as Ismail Abdool Rehman and Co., and at Seetakol in same name: a branch exists at Chhindwara, Nagpur dist., trading as Amod Haijee Latib and Co, Public achurtics Was Chairman, British Indian Assocn.. Potchefstroom, 1918-1930; repsd. Transvaal at Sessions of S.A.LC.; was responsible for inviting Mr. Sastri for laying foundation stone Indian School, Potchefstroom ; entertained members Sir Fazli Hussain Delegation, on its stay in Klerksctorp, en route for India; invited the representatives of the Govern- ment of India in South Africz was responsible for visit of Kunwar Sir Maharaj Singh in 1933; was rnember of Transvaal Indian Congress deputation to Cape Town in 1934. Was an active participant in all public affairs affecting the Indian community. In India was chairman Kutiyana Kathiwan Ektul Islam; founder Dharma Sala in Kutiyana, Kathtwar. Was keen on sport, extending his help so that it might be means of developing the physique of young Indians. Was highly respected by all Luropeans, officials and members of the public. Died at Klerks- dorp, June 21, 1938. GIDOOMAL, Daya- ram; 0. Hyderabad, Sind, 1892; educ. Hyderabad, Sind Came to South Africa in 1907, settled in Johannesburg. Here joined the firm of his uncle, D, P. Gidoomal, silk merchants. In 1918 with partners, started the Japan Bazaar, which had been developed into one of the leading Indian es- tablishments in the city of Johannesburg. Died during his visit to Capetown, Oct. 23, -1936.

---

## Page 3

348 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO GOOLAM, Rasool ; (known also as Moon- shi) : Commissioner for Oaths; 8 Lady- smith, Natal, 1887; educ. Natal. In 1908 started own business as financial, commer- cial and general agent, secty. for companies ; agent for the 4 orkshire Insurance Co., Ltd. at Pietersburg. Had an extensive practice as bookkeeper in the Northern Transvaal. Official. interpreter of the Magistrate’s Court at Pietersburg. Ap- pointed Commissioner of Oaths for Pietersburg and District in 1935. Public activities Was the secty of Northern Transvaal Indian Assocn. and secty. of the Mohammedan Congregation of Pietersburg. “He was well known throughout the Union, contested several actions for the benefit of the Indian community, namely, Immigration cases, Transvaal }.icence Control Ordinance, Post Office case. Died as a result of a motor accident, September. 1939. JOSHUA, Joseph Samuel, Commissioner of Oaths; 6. Berea, Durban, Feb. 22, 1872; am, Mary Charlotte, 3rd a. of late S. Godfrey ; educ. Boys’ Model School, Durban. Just after leaving school won the Gandhi Prize awarded for the best essay on ‘‘India, and what it can teach us.” Entered service of the Natal Government Railway as messenger, promoted clerk and clerk-in-charge of cor- respondence under (late) Sir David Hunter. On transfer to Department of Justice was presented with a parchment testimonial, being the only Indian to possess it. In 1901 was appointed clerk and interpreter at the Umgeni Court, Maritzburg. In 1912 transferred on promotion to Verulam, where remained till retirement in 1932. On retirement was thanked by the Department of Justice for meritorious services and as a mark of appreciation was made a Commissioner for Oaths, being the first Natal-born Indian to be thus honoured. During his period of service was specially appointed to act as interpreter to a number of important com- missions, including the inquiry of Indian indentured labour at Umainto, etc. During the visit of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales to Verulam, was one of the five Indians selected to be presented to him. In early days was a keen sportsman, being one of the foundation members of the Blue Bells F.C. anc the Greyville F.C. and a founder of the Greyville Cycling Clun, was a prize-winner on several occasions. A life v.- presdt. of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. ; presdt., Verulam Indian Football Club. Died at Verulam. Seal JASSAT, Ismail Amod; 6. Kholvad. Baroda State, 1871: educ. Kholvad. In 1887 went to Mauritius, working in his brother’s firm for several years. Re- turned to India and married. In 1895 came to South Africa, staying in Johannesburg, soon after started general dealer's business at Ermelo. During Boer War went to Lourenco Marques staying until war was over. His shop was looted during his absence. Returned in 1902, commenced business in Standerton in firm name of Amod and Ismail, general dealers. In 1903 re- started business at Ermelo in name of Amod and Ismail, being in charge of the Ermelo branch. In 1917 partnership was dissolved. since then has carried on business by himself. retaining the firm name of Amod and Ismail, subsequently including his sons as partners, Goolam Hoosen Jassat, Mahomed Ismail Jassat, and Moosa Ismail Jassat ; five daughters, all children born in Ermelo. Public work - Was chairman and trustee, Ermelo mosque; one of founders Ermelo Government Indian School : chairman, Indian Government School Committee. Took active part in education, social and general affairs of the Indian community. Died Ermelo, Transvaal, 1938. JUGADOE, Dabee ; b. Pietermaritzburg ; only brother of Dabee Bramdaw : edie. Pietermaritzburg. Was connected with The Natal Witness Pub- lishing Department. Public activities ; Former v.-presdt., M.D.I.F.A.; patron, presdt. and life v.- presdt., Schools’ F.C. for many years ; mem- ber, NIC. (PMB. Branch) ; was secty., Veda Dhrama Sabha, P.M.B.; was a mem- ber of the ‘Strike Committee” during the passive resistance movement of 1913; took a close interest in all public affairs. Died at Pietermaritzburg, Feb. 11, 1937. KHARVA, Hajee Ismail Amod; died October, 1939. Biography on page 137. THE SOUTH AFRICAN KALIAN Gopal merchant tatlor: bl. Narad, dist. Surat. 1880; 3rd s. of late Gopal lala, of Varad; four s. (Gulab, Nagin, Ratilat and Harila!) ; Came to South Africa in 19}2, setttec in Jo- hannesburg, where started own business as merchant tailor, trading as V. Bhana- bhai & Co. (the busi- ness is now being con- ducted by Gulab Wal- ian). Peblic activities: Was chairman and also treas. for a long period up to the time of his death of the Transvaal Dargi Mundal: member of the managing committee of the Bespoke Tailors Employers’ Assocn. ; committee member of the Transvaal Hindu Siva Samaj; also contributed his share to public work. Died at Johannesburg, April 15, 1937. KHAN, Kazi Behlol; 6. Mandvi, dist. Surat ; educ. Mandvi, in Gujarati and Arabic. Children: 6 sons and 4 daughters. Came to South Africa in Oct., 1894, landed at Dur- ban. After a_ short stay, proceeded to Jo- hannesburg. From Jo- hannesburg went to Zeerust in 1898 and then to Bulawayo, S. Rhodesia, being one of the pioneer Indians and among the first to secure the fran- chise; he also inter- ested himself in acquiring a cémetery for Muslims. With headquarters in Bulawayo he carried on business in various parts, making trips to Bechuanaland and the Kalahari. From 1901-6 established _ business, with six branch stores at Zeerust, in the firm name of B. B. Khan & Co. In 1906 transferred interests to Lichtenburg, where the firm, with four branch stores, is still actively engaged in commerce, being one of the leading Indian businesses in the district. There isa wholesale buying house at cr. Kort & Commis- sioner St., Johannesburg. Publicactivities: In 191llan active member of the Home Rule League, a strong sup- porter of Hindu-Muslim co-operation. Took a prominent part in the public life of Mandvi; in 1919 founded the Mandvi Public Library; in 1922-25 being connected with Mahatma Gandhi's movement, while loyal to the British connection was still patriotic in serving the interests of his countrymen; was v-presdt., Mandvi High School; patron, Mandvi Educational Society; was presdt., Mandvi Khalifat Committee. In South Africa took part in the Passive Resistance struggle, 1908-14; had taken interest in all public efforts, contributing both service and money, Died in Johannesburg, March L2, 1937. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 349 KHAN, Rahim Karim; was Barrister- at-law, member of Lin- coln's Inn; member Supreme Court of Judt- cature, England; ad- vocate Supreme Court of South Africa (N.P.D.). &. Bombay, March 24, 1874: died Oct. 8, 1932. During Boer War acted as leader of Ambulance Corps at Colenso and Spion Wop, etc., giving services free, for which he was thanked by Government and decorated with the usual medal; was for many years joint secty. of the Natal Indian Congress. Repstd. Natal at S.A.LC. Conferences was appointed by Government of Natal as member of Board of Examinecs for Indian languages. On his death left practically his whole estate, ex- ceeding £40,000, for Indian medical relief. MEER, Cassim Hajee Suleman; 56. Surat City, Oct. 12, 1884. Died at Dundee, May 30, 1930. Educ. Surat City. Came to South Africa in 1896, settled in Dundee, where he was in busi- ness. He was the leading Indian in the district, prominently identifying himself with public work Chairman of the Natal Indian Congress, Dun- dee Branch; presdt. ot the Northern Natal Chamber of Commerce; presdt. of the Muslim Congregation; presdt. of the Dundee and District Indian Football Assocn.; was an official of practicaliv all public bodies in Northern Natal; was a member of Congress deputation to the Minister of the [nterior, Dr. D. I’. Malan, in connection with the Class Areas Bill, 1925; repstd. Natal at the S.A.I.C. Conferences from 1919. Was also a large donor of the Sastri College Building Fund, was one of those responsible for starting the Indian School at Dundee. Was a strong advocate of Muslim female education. In India repstd. Surat City at the All-India Muslim Educational Conference, elected as one of the members of the reception committee of 17; joint secty. of the reception committee of the All-India National Congress held at Surat City ; was a large donor towards, and instrumental toa great extent in, the erection of the Surat Islam Yatimkhana; first chairman of its committee. Collected a large sum of money for the Khalifat Fund, which was signally recognised by its committee, consisting of distinguished Muslims. He is survived by his widow and 11 children, the sons are Yousuf, Ebrahim, Mahomed and Suleman.

---

## Page 4

THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 350 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO MAKAN Jogi, mer- chant tailor; 6. Gan- devi, Baroda State, 1883; v. s. of late Jogi Hira; twos., five d.; educ. Gandevi. Came to South Africa in 1901, settled in Johannes- burg, where was in business with his brothers, trading as Jogi & Co. Took over the business concern in 1930. After death, firm is pow being con- ducted by his son, Manilatl Makan, 432, Delaréy Street, Phone 35-2014. Public activi- ges: Member of the Transvaal Dargi Mundal and one of the pioneers of the Darji community in the Transvaal. Died on board ship, April 11, 1938. MAHARAJ, Boboolal; o. s. of late Hamraj Maharaj: b. Port Eliza- beth, June 17, 1884: died in Pretoria, 1935. m. Rajawanthi 3rd d. of Ramphall, of Pre- toria. Was in busi- ness; Indian interpreter of the magistrate anct Supreme Courts; pro- perty owner. Public activilics V.-presdt., TIC. (Pretoria Branch) and represented Trans- vaal at various sessions of the S.A.1.C. Confer- ence, including the first conference. Treas. of the Transvaal Indian Defence Assocn.: v.-presdt., Transvaal British Indian Agsocn., which has now merged into the Congress. Took part in Passive Resistance struggle in 1909, suffering a term of three months’ imprisonment. V.-presdt., Hindu Seva Samaj; committee member of the Pretoria Indian Hospital Committee ; chairman of the Pretoria Devi Temple ; as one of the leading Indians presented to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales; chairman of the Hindu Assocn. Had a South African reputation as one of the best Indian soccer players in the country ; played in the forward position; started in the year 1902, repstd, Transvaal on three occasions; vi-capt., 1913 and 1924; capt., 1926; played for years for Pretoria inter-district, captained the Pretorians I'.C, for many years. V.-capt. of the first South African soccer team to India, 192-22. Presdt. twice P.D.1.F.A.; also life v.-presdt. and treas. for last 10 years. Was prominently connected with the tour of the All-India football team to the Union, 1934. Also played rugby since 1905, repstd. Pretoria in eleven inter-district matches, captained nine others, and on one occasion capt. of the Transvaal ; played for Standards ; captained the club for 16 years, was a life v.-presdt. An out- standing cricket player, repstd. Transvaal Colourds on three occasions, 1907-9-23; repstd. Pretoria for many years, played from 1902 till '34. Was also a fine swimmer, cyclist, boxer, and weight-lifter. Was one of the best known figures in South African sporting circles. MEHTA, Jaya- shanker Bhaichand; a nephew of Reva- shanker Jagjivan Javeri, Bombay and Dr. P. J. Mehta, Ran- goon ; 6. Morvi, Nathi- war, 1878; died, Dur- ban, Aug. 5, 1931. On leaving school was in the service of Dhuram- pur, one of the large Indian states. Soon after he accompanied Mahatma Gandhi to South Africa, arriving in Durban, Dec., [896. Was a clerk in Mr. Gandhi's office till 1900 and fora short time was with the late Parsee Rustomijee. He started own business in Grey Street, urban, adjoining the present mosque, where he established a very successiul and sald concern. He gave freely of what he had, £100 to the Sastri Coliege Building Fund, and in his wall left £1,230 for educational scholarships, £250 for a hospital at Durban, £150 for the erection of the Nathiwar Arva Mandal building and many other amounts to private and public charities. For his donations during the Great War, he was thanked by the then Mayor of Durban. He is survived by his widow and two sons Shantilal and Chimanlal Mehta. MOODLEY, A. Ganess (see under “G"). MURUGAN, Tom, former fruit and cane farmer; 6. nr. Arcot, Madras Vresidency, 1850. pioneer friut farmer, developing business on a consider- able scale. ‘The family has large farming in- terests. Public actini fes ; Had great in- fluence with all sections of the community; was widely known and respected amony all sections of the com- munity. Died at his farm at New Glasgow, April, 1927. survived by two brothers, namely, T. Moonsamy, T. P.Sam, MOODLEY, Govind- amah ; 6. Maritzburg, 1906; d. of Charlie Nulliah, of Pieter- maritzburg ; a7. S. A. Moodley, brassware manufacturer, of Dur- ban, September 106, 1933; two s., one d.; educ. York Road Govt. Indian School, Maritz- burg. Passed Junior and Senior Indian Teachers’ Certificate Examination. In 1925 joined the staff of the York Road Govern- ment Indian School, resigning on her mar- : riage. Public activitics Took a keen interest in all matters affecting the Indian community, particularly women and children welfare. Was a member of the Mariteburg Indian Parliamentary Debating Society, occupying at one session a “ministerial” appointment, being ‘‘Minister of Education”; was presdt. Indian Women’s League. Died July 23, 1939. MQOSA, Hajee Is- mail Amod Haffejee; 6. Tadkeshwar, Bom- bay, Feb. 6. 1890; ¢. s. of A. H. Moosa, mer- chant, Durban. Man- aged firm of A. H. Moosa til 1914, when took charge of the Bombay office; made himself very popular with commercial and public life of Bombay. Was made member of the Willingdon Club, the Islam Club and the Imperial Indian Citizenship Assocn., Bombay. Toured Europe, 1921, on return brought back a Rolls koyce, being first Indian owner. Formed Red Crescent Society, of which he was elected treas., helped in sending large sum of money to Turkey during the Balkan War. In Bombay his home was open to all South African visitors, entertaining $.A.1.C. deputation and Beyer’s Delegation. Was keen on starting large textile factory in Durban but, owing to the Government not being prepared to admit a certain number of workers from India, abandoned the project. Was largely responsible for the Indian Traders’ memor ndum tothe Fazl-i Hussain Delegation, 1932. Keen on education, donated 10,000 rupees for scholarship to the Aligarh University and has provided com- mercial scholarships for South African Indian students at Bombay. A donor to the Sastri College Building Fund. One of the founders of the Orient Club, Durban, A man with progressive views and an ardent worker for the uplift of the community. Treas. of the Indo-European Joint Council for several years. On his return, after having completed his pilgrimage, died at Jedda, Arabia, April 17, 1934. NAGAR Gopal; 0. Kachholi, disé. Surat, 1880; educ. Kachholi. Came to South Africa and joined his brother, Icharam Gopal, one of the first Indians to work as a tatlor in Johannesburg. — Busi- ness now being con- trolled by his brother, KXalian Gopal, anc son, Vasanjee Nagar, Ran- chhodbhai and Gov- indbhai Nagar. Public activities : Former presdt., and also was secty., Transvaal Dargi Mandal ; v.-presdt., Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj ; Crematorium Committee. deserving public appeals. 10, 1937. NAIDOO, P. K.; 4. Natal, eventually settled in the Trans- vaal. ‘Yook a promin- ent part in public activities. and was the seety. of the Transvaal Indian British Avsocn. Visited India to secure co-operation of — the Government and people for the removal of Indian disabilities in South Africa. Was in| Maritzburg in the Indian strike of 1913, being arrested and re- lease] on £3,000 hail. Die:] in Johannesburg. NAIR, Kamatlam; teacher: 6. Durban, May 17, 1913; es. of Ramsamy Naidoo, of Point Koad, Durban m. Kenneth Reuben Nair, 1932; one «.; educ. Depot Road Govt Indian School ; St. Vhilomena School, Chelmsford Road, Dur- ban. Passed Indtan Junior Teachers’ Cer- tificate, 192 T.4, 1934. In 1928 joined the teaching staff of the M. K. Gandhi Sentimel School and in 1932 Roosfontein Govt. member of the Hindu A generous giver to all Died Iwachholi, {ndia, Nov. Indian School. Retired owing to illness in 1935. Public activines Treas., Women’s Auxiliary of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society and was closely connected with all her husband's public activities. Died February 19, 1939.

---

## Page 5

352 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO OSMAN, Hajee Ahmed; 6, Porbandar, Kathiwar, 1847; died ‘Feb., 1927, Came to South Africa. 1890, being among the early Indian merchants. Started business in Durban, which he conducted till the time of his death; was a large property owner. Public actrurties : An ardent worker for the interests of the Memon “community, bejng a foundation member and trustee of the Juma Masgid Trust. Went on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1910. Sur- vived by widow, I son (Fakir Osman) and 6 daughters PANDAY, Lutch- man; 2nd. s. of late Seebaluk Panday; 6. Berea, Durban, April 21, 1874; edec, Albert Street, and Boys’ Model School, Durban, ‘On leaving school joined firm of advo- ates and __ solicitors, with which he had been connected for the last 47 years. Public ac- tivities: Wasmemberof the executive of the N.LC., being one of its oldest members ; served in the Anglo- Bocr War under Mr. Gandhi, awarded the Queen's Medal. Was chairman of the Sydenham Indian Health Board and Rate- payers’ Assocn; appeared for this body before the Greater Durban Boundary Commission. Chairman of the Vishnu Temple, Sea Cow Lake. Repstd. Natal at various sessions of the S.A.1.C. Conferences held in many parts of the Union. Repstd. Natal at the All-India National Congress at Lahore, in 1909-10. Was a keen sportsman, playing both football and cricket; was a member of the Yorkshire F.C. and Crimson League F.C., played centre-half and later goalkeeper. Was the organiser of the first football team to Johannesburg, 1899, and was once prominently associated with organising interdistrict matches; held many posts as an official of sporting bodies. Was the donor of the Panday Bros.’ Shield for Natal ‘cricket, and a Cup for Natal tennis championship. Also Panday Shield for Natal Indian Boy Scouts. Died August, 1939. PADAYACHEE, Ramakrishna Veer- apen Marday ; b. Port Louis, Mauritius, Oct. 7, 1875; four d., two s.; educ. Port Louis. Arrived in Dur- ban, Natal, May 31, 1896, by the “Harlech Castle.” After a short stay in Durban pro- ceeded to Johannes- burg, where worked as a clerk. At the out- break of the Boer War came back to Natal, stayed in Maritzburg for two years, when started farming. Later removed to New Germany, where engaged in business as fruiterer and farmer, In 1913 came back to Maritz- burg, opening tobacconist and general dealer's business, in which he was engaged. Was also property owner. Public achvities : Was v.-presdt. of the Mauritius Hindu Friendly Society, established in 1896, which was one of the first Hindu societies in the Transvaal. Was secty. of the Vania Kula Kshvatri Sabha, 1907-15, when a commencement of the Hindu Temple building was made; from 1915 to 1938, its president. In 1929 erected at his own expense additional buildings at S.5. Temple. Died at Pietermaritzburg, Natal, Aug. 2, 1938. PATEI., Karabhai Fakirbhai ; 4. Hari pura; dest. Bardoli, 1878; two s. (Ranch- hodji and Valtabhbhat) three d.; cdc. Hari- pura Arrived in South Africa, 1900, landed at East London ; in 1902 came to Johannesburg. In 1912 opened busi- ness, wholesale produce merchants, in the name of F. K. Patel & Co., started Patel & Sons, in Newtown, 1924. Public activities Was presdt., Transvaal United Patidar Society: v.-presdt., Transvaal British Indian Assocn. ; chairman, Hindu Crematorium Committee; v.-presdt., Hindu Seva Samaj; presdt., Haripura Shreya Sadik Mundal ; treas., Transvaal Indian Congress. In India took part in the Civil Disobedience movement, 1921, and again in 1930; chairman, Vaghecha Samasan Committee. There were not many movements concerning his compatriots with which he was not either directly or indirectly connected. Had been a generous giver to the Patidar Hall and Library Scheme, Hindu Seva Samaj Gandhi Hall and Temple Fund. Died at Johannesburg, September 29, 1937. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 353 PATEL, Muljibhai Girdharbhai (known as Mulji G. Patel); 6. Dharmaj, dist. Petiad (Baroda! August L&, 1878; educ, Baroda High School, matricu- lated 1898 (Bombay University). Came to South Africa 1902, starting work as book- keeper with various firms ; also interpreter, translator, general and estate agent. At one time or another was connected with many classes of business. Was proprietor of Bombay Warehouse (silk); a director S. African Co-op Prudential Estates, Ltd. Waschiefand soleagent for Indian business of National Mutuat Life Assocn. of Australasia, Ltd. Jo'’burg. Ever since arrivalin S. Africa had taken part in public affairs. One of the early associates of Mr. Gandhi, helping him open his legal office in Johannesburg. Member of Transvaal British Indian Assocn. (jomt- secty, with Mr H. 5s. £. Pollak). One of the petitioners to Parliament for removal of restrictions of Gold Law in 1919 which resulted in Act 37 of 1919. Was member deputation to Viceroy (lord Reading) in 1922 in con- nection with South African clisabilities. During passage of Class Arcas Bill took part in opposition to this measure anc greatly helped Paddison deputation in its investigation of South African affairs. Was a Transvaal representative to S.A.1.C. Conferences for many years. Was one of founders (chairman 3 years) of the Hindu Crematorium in Johannesburg—one of best known institutions of its kind in South Africa. Greatly interested in all public movements for ad- vancement of the community. Died in India, 1939. PILLAY, Kumarsamy Krishnasamy; 0. Tanjore, Madras, Dec. 25, 1867. Came to South Africa in 1884. Visited Transvaal and the Cape for the pur- pose of starting busi- ness but eventually opened a general ‘dealer's store in Dur- ban, 190L; soon after transferred interests to Greenwood Park, where had conducted a successful business. Public work : Repstd. Natal at S.A.1.C. Con- ferences at Cape Town, Kimberley, Johannesburg and other places; took part in the first Passive Resistance movement, under Mr. M. K. Gandhi, in the Transvaal in 1908; founder of the Greenwood Park Indian School, 25 years ago, and the Ranganathan Temple; was trustee of the Umgeni S. S. Temple; was treas.,C.B. and 5.1. Asseen. Died at Greenwood Park, 1936. PAUL, Henry Louis; &, Madras Presidency, March 18, 1864; dled, June 1, 1933 > a. Ellen Elizabeth Johnson, at Turban, Feb. 23, 1889; Sch. Arrived at Dur- ban in the barque Cnicat?, Sept. 3. 1881. Entered the Natal Railway Service in the same month and sub- sequently became asst. Maintenance store- keeper. He left that department five years later and was in service with the African Boat- ing Company, Point, Durban, and later with the Durban Borough Police. On fan. 3, 1889. entered the Civil Service, then at the Stanger Magistrate's Court, as Indian interpreter. On Dec, 2 of the same year transferred on promotion as clerk and senior Indian interpreter, to the Chief Magistrate's Department, Durban, a position which he held under three Governments— Natal Crown Colony Government, Responsible Government, and lastly the Union Government. His splendid record was said to be unique in the service, added to which was his exemplary, unblemished and excellent character. He retired on March 18, 1924. He was thanked by the then Minister of Justice (Mr. de Wet) for the unique record of over 34 years’ continuous Government service, without a single day's absence. Addresses eulogising his services were presented to him by the staff of magistrates and other civil servants, with which the Kar also associated itself, and also the Indian community. He was also a keen public worker. particularly in the field of education, and was instrumental in establishing the frst Government School for Indians in Durban. He was a devout Roman Catholic and an active worker for the Indian section of the Church. Through his efforts, the first priest to work exclusively among Indians and to take charge of St. Anthony's Mission came out. Other positions he held included: st presdt. and founder, Indian United Elevea Cricket Club; Natal Indian Football Assocn. ; Greyville Sporting <Assocn.: Grevville Cycling Club; United Sporting Assocn. ; Higher Grade School Club; Natal [Indian Educationa! Asscen ; Higher Grade School Old Boys’ Assocn.; Indian Benevolent Society; Indian Clerks’ and Inter- preters’ Assocn. SAMMY, Mapplysamy Pillay; «&. Tanjore, about 1856, died Kimberley, August, 1933. 4 sons and 2 daughters. Left Madras with his parents for Mauritius. [ater he alone came to South Africa, being among the pioneer Indians to settle in Port Elizabeth. Subsequently removed to Kimberley, where he was in business, being one of the prominent Indian citizens of the Diamond City. He was one of the first [Indians to become a wholesale merchant in the Cape. He was highly respected by all sections of the community and was intimately known to the many pioneer Europeans prominently connected with the development of Kimberley.

---

## Page 6

354 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN “WHO'S WHO RAWAT, Ebrahim Cassim ; 6 Nana Varachha, dist. Surat, about 1850, died, 1929. A pioneer merchant in Natal. Settled in Mar- itzburg, where he spent the rest of his life. Founded the firm of E. C. Rawat in 1880, general dealers. Was highly respected by all sections of the com- munity. Is survived by two sons, Moosa Ebrahim Rawat, Dur- ban, and Ismail Eb- rahim Rawat, Maritz- burg,and Mrs. Mahomed Jeewa, of Durban, and numerous grandchildren, RAWAT, Hajee Is- mail Ebrahim; 6. Nanavarachha, dist. Surat, 1877. Came to South Africa, follows ing his father 10 years Jater. Joined’ his father’s business in Maritzburg, which 25 now being conducted by his sons. Mahome.l Ismail Rawat, Suliman 1. Rawat, Goolam Hoo- sen }. Rawat, Abdool Hack I. Rawat and Amod Ismail 1. Rawat. Made a pilgrimage to pecea in 1933, Was highly esteemed by all sections of >on ity Died June 15, 1939, at Mariteburg, Fhe community. RUSTOMJEE, Parsee, merchant and philanthropist; b. India. One of the pioneer merchants in South Africa and con- nected with Indian public life since his arrival. Suffered several terms of im- prisonment during the Passive Resistance movement, On his death bequeathed, with his wife, Jerbai, the major portion of his estate for the use of the Indian community, erecting the M. K, Gandhi Iabrary, Rustomjee Hall, orphanages. schools and other educational requirements. His bequest is the highest gift to the Indian community in S.A. PILLAY, Muthu- samy Nadesa ; b. Porayar, dist. Tanjore, Madras, 1867; éduc. Porayar. Came to South Africa in 1896, settled in Durban. A few years afterwards went to Johannesburg. During the Boer War returned to Durban, where he took up per- manent residence. Started business as cigar manufacturer, was a partner tr the Imperial Cigar Manu- facturing Co. Resigned and started on his own, eventually joining the Standard Cigar Co., Durban: Public activities Was chairman, then trustee, of the S.V Temple, Umgeni Road, Durban; a keen supporter of vernacular education and of Hindu social reforms. Survived by two d. and two xs. (Manikam Pillay and Thangavaloo Pillay). Died, August 31, 1937. : SOBRUN, Dhanook- dharie ; was Civil Ser- vant, Senior Interpreter and Commiszimer for Oaths: &. May 14. 1880, at Duffs Road Natal; educ, at the Railway Day and Nigkt Schools. In 1903 i. youngest daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs. Dabee, of Pietermaritzburg— the well known and progressive old colonist of the day. Was first emploved on the fate Natal Government Railways, as messenger, timekeeper of Indian and Native staff, and Jatterly as clerk-in-charge of the Railway Post Office, Durban. Received appointment in the Union Civtl Service as an Indian interpreter-clerk, at Howick (Lions River District) on February t, F911; was transterred, on promotion, to the Law Courts, Durban, on June 1, 1922. In July, 1932 was promoted to the Senior Indian interpretership, and on January 18, 1935, was appointed Commissioner for Oaths, being the first Indian Civil Servant in Natal to have the appointment conferred upon him. He had taken a prominent part in Hindu religious, educational, social and charitable organisations, was one af the trustees of the following institutions : (1) Shri Thakurdwara and Dharmasala, Durban (the leading Hindi Hindu Temple in Natal); (2) Shr Ramayan Sabha, Overport, Durban (the first Society to bring out a Hindi teacherand preacher from India) ; (3) Nagri Par- charani Sabha, Howick, Natal; (4) School managet of the Overport 3.R.S. Government-Aided Indian School—appointed by the Education Department of Natal Province. Died August 13, 1934. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 355 SADER, Hoosen Eb- rahim ; 6. Wharod, India, 1878; came to South Africa in 1894. First stayed in Durban, then came to [ady- smith, 1897. Was in private employment, in 3899 opened busi- ness in the firm name of Ameer & Hoosen. In 1909 paid a short visit to India. After returning increased business to a fairly Jarge Native trade. Atso had few branches in the district of lip ; River. He was highly respected by all who knew him, He was very keen on education, has sent his second son, Ahmed, first from Ladysmith to Sastri College, Durban, who had passed the |ondon Matriculation Examinations in June, 1937; | since proceeded to Birmingham University, England. to study medicine. After his death the name of the firm was changed to Fstate H. E. Sader, which is now carried on by his cldest son, Ebrahim. Is survived by widow, six sons and five daughters. His death was mourned by a very large family settled in South Africa and in India. Died 17th July, 1936. SHADAZADEE, Mrs. Abdulla ; b. Moradabad, India, 1877, 2d d. of late Fedahosseni; +. late Abdulla Minda, — for- merly merchant, of Durban, four s., four d.: Came to Natal by S.S “Foyle,” in 1883. settled in Durban. After period of em- ployment started own business in the Durban Borough Market, which was then located in the old Empire Theatre building, now Central Post.,Office. She was ; among the first Muslim women to enter commercial business. She subsequently transferred business interests to Overport; in 1918 commenced firm of general dealers. She admitted sons as partners. Trading as Sahidon & Sons {\ Roshan and Yassin Mahomed), general dealers, butchers and refreshment room. Was large property owner. Public actaviites : Charitably minded, being a large donor to Islamia Madressa, Overport. Died at her residence, Over port, July 7, 1939. SINGH, Buldav Mahadey ; ¢. s. of late Bulday Singh ; b. Durban, Aug. 13, 1885; educ, Victoria Street Government Indian School, Boys’ Model School, Smith Street, and Higher Grade Gov- ernment Indian School, Alice Street, Durban; ow. daughter of late Dulsingar Singh of Kearsney. First in private employment, opened his first busi- ness in partnership with his father at Cato Manor. Had since been engaged in various trades—wood and coal merchant property, butchery, quarry, etc.—being among the few colonial-born Indians to show outstanding qualities of business enterprise. Publicactvities Was V.-presdt., N.LC.; trustee, Durban Hindu Temple; was one of those responsible for the building of the Aryan Benevolent Home and School at Cato Manor ; presdt., Cato Manor Cemetery ; trustee, Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn. and official of numerous other bodies. Formerly a leading racehorse owner. Died, Durban, 1937. SINGH, Chundoo; s. of Bhagthou Singh: 6. Jaipur, 1851. Came to Natal in 1883. After serving the period of his contract, started farming, later opened general dealer's store. Was a large property owner, Public achvittes : Took prominent part in the Indian strike of 1913. A founder of the Gopallal Hindu Temple, Verulam; founder and president of the Shree Ramayan Sabha. Oakford. Was one of the leading Hin- dus of the clistrict of Verulam. Viisted India, 1914 and 1936. 55..2d. Died, September 6, 1938. TIKLY, Hajee Ismail; 4. Kholvad. One of the pioneer merchants of Pietersburg. He arrived in Durban in 1885. He was manager of the firm of Aboobaker Amod, Durban. In 1880 came to Transvaal and started business in Pretoria. During the Boer War returned to India, from there going to Bourbon. After a short stay he came back to South Africa ; in 1902 again took up residence in Pretersburg. He was one of the founders of the Pictersburg Mosque and took an active interest in the Mosque work at Kkholvad. Survived by three sons : Amod (Pietersburg) Suleman (Zeerust} and Mahomed (Pietersburg). Died at Zeerust, 1919.

---

## Page 7

SODHA, Ratanjhi Mulji ; 0. Rajkot, dist. Kathiawar, 1885 ; dicd Aug. 12, 1930; educ. “Rajkot High School, After schooling became business manager of The Kathiaway Times. At this time became connected with Mahatma (then Mr.) Gandhi, being the printer of the famous green pamphlet con- taining grievances of Natal Indians. He de- cided, on being invited by, Mr.‘Gandhi, to come out to Natal in order#to serve his countrymen. On arrival tn 356 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO Natal joined late Mr. Madanjit in founding the International Printing Works, which later printed The Indian Opinion. After few years resigned and started business. At outbreak of Passive Resistance in 1907 left business and joined Mr. Gandhi in the Transvaal and served with his wife, both being con- victed, suffering several terms of imprisonment, In 1911 took up residence in Transvaal, being ad- mitted as an educated entrant with six other Indians. Always associated himself with public work right up to time of his death. founded Gujarati Samachar, His friendship with the Indian Nationalist leader, Mahatma Gandhi, continued throughout, to whom he gave his sons, Revanshanker, who sulfered imprison- ment in the 1913 struggle, anc Chotalal who was at Phoenix and at Sabarmati with him. Attended the S.A.LC. Conference as Transvaal delegate to the Durban sessions which were presided over by Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, RHODESIAN SECTION ABDULA Harun; wholesale merchant : 6. Cutch Koday, Cutch, 1885 ; e. s. of late Harun Hajee Omar; four s., Jushab Abdula, Abdu! Saccoor Abdula, Ebrahim Abdula, Harun Abdula; three @. ; educ. Bombay City. In 1901 came to the Transvaal, in 1906 to Lourenco Marques, where joined the staff as bookkeeper of Jacaria Hajee Amod & Co. In 1915 con- ducted the branch store of Jacaria Hajee Amod & Co., trading as Casa Abdula Harun. In 1926 went back to India and left business in charge of his sons, Joosub Abdula and Abdul Saccoor Abdula. In 1933 business was transferred to the name of the three elder brothers who trade as Jushab Abdula & Co., and also Casa Abdula Harun, agents for Goodvear foot products and Phillips soles. Public achvities - Took part in all public Muslim movements. Died at Cutch Koday. 1934 DESAI, Gulabbhai Makenji; merchant ; b. Kattargam, dist. Surat. 1892: Sth s. of late Makenji Naranji Desai; two-s., one d. : educ, Mission High School, Surat. On leaving school came to Southern Rhodesia in 1909, stayed at Selu- kwe joining the firm of Bhimji R. Naik. In 19)5 started own business as general merchant in Gwelo and Selukwe. In 1938 re- joined the firm of Bhunji RR Naik, managing head office at Salisbury. Public activities : Was Chairman of the Gwelo Hindu Society; rep. Gwelo at the Hindu Conference at Salisbury, 1936. Member of the Coloured School Council. Keen on education, has his daughter at the Nanya Maha Vidalya, of Baroda. Recreations . Reading and Indian politics. Died at Salisbury, 193s. ae “~p " Erected for the medical needs of the Indian community by the Indian-African Line. (formerly Andrew Weir & Co.), now the Bank Line, Ltd. The building, which cost over £5,000, is an annexe of the King Edward VIII Hospital at Durban, and is meeting a very useful! purpose as an out-patient department. (Established 1914) Recommended by the Medical Profession for INVALIDS AND BABIES Section of the Byre oe the Highwood Dairies. Highwood Milk Carriers leaving the Dairy on their ; Rounds. ' Section of Dairy. 243 D’Aintree Avenue, SYDENHAM, DURBAN. Cows in Paddock with the famous Fedigree “Carna- tion” Bull in the forefront Phone 8-8991 HIGHWOOD DAIRIES THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 357

---

