# Who's Who (1936-37)

**Book ID:** whos-who-1936-pt4
**Total Pages:** 19

---

## Page 1

114 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO Ebrahim; b.Sans- rod, Broach, 1904; ed. Sansrod and Govern- ment Indian School, Pretoria. After school, joined father’s business of general dealer and fruit smerchant, 400, Asiatic Bazaar, Pre- toria and = Stall 21 Municipal Market. Now in charge of the busi- ness, Public work : Member, @Qucen Street Mosque for which he wrs one of those who collected a large sum of money throughout the Union; chairman, Pretoria Tslamic Society ; member, Pretoria Indian Market Assocn.; Vv presdt., Swaraj F.C.; v.-presdt., Pretoria Indian Lawn Tennis Club; Committee member, Transvaal Kanamia Moham- medan Assocn. and also of the Pretoria Branch. In Sansrod was chairman Sansrod Mosque and Islamic School. Address ¢ 400, Asiatic Bazaar, Phone 2535, Pretoria, Transvaal. () woration: Moosa OMAR, Sali Mahomed Essa, (See under Essa). OOMER, Abdul Karim 3; merchant ; 6. Porbandar, 1881; educ. Porbandar. Came to South Africa in 1895, landed at Durban, later proceeded to Standerton. Here in private employment. During the Boer War returned to India; came back to Stande ton, on the declara- tion of peace, where he started business iu 1909. Sold business in 1925 and then stayed in India for five years. In 1930 returned to Standerton, acquiring the business interests of A. H. Cassim; also proprtetor of The Bombay House, Pictersburg. Public achuities In India was treas. of the Meman Anjuman, Porbandar ; committee member of the Porbandar Madressa and Juma Masgid and Meman Jamat; these are well known institutions in Porbandar. He himself has large vested interests in Porbandar. .tddress > (in Indra} A, Karim Oomer, Bhura Buildings, Suriawar, Porbandar, Kathiwar ; (In South Africa) Market Square, P.O. Box 173, Phone 72, Pietersburg, Transvaal. OSMAN, Fakir Mahomed Ahmed ; 6. Durban, June 8, 1914; educ. Marine College and private study, Durban, Man- ager of father’s—Hajee Ahmed Osman’s—es- tate and successor in business. ‘lakes a keen interest in all public activities affecting the Indian community. Keen on sport. Address: 15, Mansfield Ixd., Durban, Natal. ena ADAYACHEE,. Ayar Magalin- gam; .Vappathur, Madras Presidency, 1880 ; edue. Vappathur; ne. Thayanayageeammal e. d. of S, Valoo Paday- achee, of Durban: 3s., 4d. Came to South Africa, 1895, settled in) Durban. Started own business as fruit merchant and exporter in 1908, trading in own name, Is also a large estate owner, Public activities : Former treas. of the Hindu Sudhar Sabha, practically the first Hindu organisation in Nata, being founded by Bhai Parmanand of India; trustee of the Hindu ‘Tamil Institute; treas. of the Umbilo Temple: v.-presdt., South African Hindu Maha Sabha; presdt. of the Durban Indian Vruiterers' Assocn; former committee member of the N.LC. A strong supporter of all deserving objects; built at own expense a hall for community service at the Umbilo Hindu Temple. Address - (Res.) 71, Leopold St., Phone C, 4836: (Bus.) 34, Cross St., Phone Cc. 4836, Box 195. Yel. add.: ‘‘Naartjies,’’ Durban, Natal. For THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 115 PADAYACHEY, Ava- tharanam Veerappen; 6b. Pretoria, Aug. 4, 1904: educ. Pretoria and Higher Grade School, Durban, After school was in private employ- ment. Entered postal service, Jan. 13, 1921, left May 31, 1925, owing to abolition of office. In 1926 started business as general dealer in Pretoria, Has since added a branch store. Keenly interested in commercial matters and is the only Tamil- ian engaged in this class of business in Pretoria. Public work : Vice-chair- man, Young Men’s Vedic Club; was joint secty. of the Tamil Vedic League ; presdt., Pirates Football Club; Secty, Retail Traders’ Improvement Association, Addyess : 448, Bloed St., Asiatic Bazaar, Phone 3545, Pretoria, Transvaal. ee PADAYACHI, Ven- gadalam Naram- samy; also known as VL N. Kain; es. of Conaree Vengadalam; &. Durban, 1885. Came to Maritzburg at the age of five; edite. Wesleyan School and private study, Maritz- burg; om. Syamah, a. of Perumal Govender, Umainto. In 1914 took up residence in Durban. Secty. of the Hindu Tamil Institute, 1915-16; secty. Tamil Angum and Shri Vay- thiyanatha Lasparer Temple, Umgent Road, Durban. Secty., Hindu Tamil [nstitute Educational Board. On return to Maritzburg joined H.Y.ALA., elected Committee member, v.-presdt., 1927-30; presdt.. 1931-33. One of the adjudicators clected by the Maritzburg Temple congregation to inquire into the working of the finance of the Siva Soobramonium Marriemanum Temple. Served on other investigating committees. Address : 533, Church St., Pictermaritzburg, Natal. PADAYACHY., Tiruvengadam Narayana; also known by trade name of T. N. Sammy; / Tilliyadt, Tanjore, S. India, 1884, a member of the family of one of the heredity village elders of Tilliyadt; educ. Villiyadi. Came to Seuth Africa in 1901. First stayed in Cape Town, later re- moved to Kimberley, where took up per- manent residence. Is proprietor of the firm of T. N. Sammy, general dealers, Public activities : Asst. secty., Kimberley Political Assocn., 1910-18; secty., Vannia Kula Ksythria Sabha; asst. secty., H.Y.MLS., 1909- 1912. Takes an active interest in encouraging Ube study of the Tamil language ; under the auspices of the Hindu Vedic Sabha, assisted by others, in providing frce Tamil education, Made several visits to India, Address : 38, Warren St., Kimberley, Cape Province. PADAYATCHY, Renganathan Vasu- deva ; 4. Mayavaram, Madras, 1889; edue. Mayavaram. Came to South Africa with his father in 191], being admitted as an cdu- cated entrant. Settled in Kimberley, engaged as a fruiterer till 1918, when opened general dealer's business. Public activities Secty., In- dian Political Assocn., 1919-22; secty., Hindu Vedic Sabha, was an honorary teacher of the vernacular school conducted by the Sabha: presdt., Hindu Vedic Sabha, 1931 to date; joint secty. of the Indian Political Assucn., 1931 to date. Paid two visits to India since first arrival, a member of the Mayavaram Panchayat Board. Address ; 2, Hull St., Kimberley, Cape Province.

---

## Page 2

116 THE AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PAHAD, Mahomed Dawijee ; b. Iholvad, India, 1896 ; educ, Bombay, Arrived in South Africa in LOL7. Opened gencral dealer's business in Bethal in 1919, which has grown to be one of the leading Indian busine in Eastern Transvaal, trading in own name of M.D. Pahad. Has also a branch store in Bethal. Puble actrvl- fest Chairman of Muslim Club, Bethal: one of the Icading Indians in the district. Is popular among all The Feuropeans have clected him Bethal European Football and Rugby Club. P.O, Box 113, Phone 19, Bethal, ‘Vransvaal. PALSANIA, Chunilal Chhitaram ; &. Boo- hari, Bardoli, dist. Surat, 1911; educ. Trafalgar High School, Cape Town, Methodist Boys’ School. Baroda, ancl Anglo-American College, Madyas. On return to South Africa settled in Cape Town, starting [ruiterer’s busi- méss, in which 38 en- gaged. Public work : Organising secty., Cape Indian Congress ; joint- secty., Hindu Assocn. ; general secty., Mesuria Mitra Mandal. Add: 127, Loop St., Caz PANDAY, Jaikrun Balkissoon ; 6. Dur- ban, 1904; educ. Car- lisle Street Government Indian = School In employment as clerk, One of the leading boxing promoters in South Africa and was responsible tor arrang- ing most of the biggest ropean boxing contests in the country, including the visit of Kid Mottee Singh. Was captain of the Durban Indian Golf Club; treas. of the Avondale Hindu Benevolent Society; secty., Wools C. C. and holds various other official positions, Address ¢ 7, Madras Rd., Durban, Natal. community. v.-presdt. of the PANDAY, Lutch- man; 2rd. s. of late Seebaluk Panday; 8. Berea, Durban, April 21, 1874; edute. Albert Street, and Boys’ Model School, Durban. On leaving school joined firm of advo- cates and solicitors, with which he has beer connected for the last 47 years, — Public ac- frerties Member of the executive ot the NvLC., being one of its oldest members ; served in the Anglo- Boer War under Mr. Gandhi, awarded the Oucen's Medal. Chairman of the Sydenham [Indian Health Board and Rate- payers’ Assocn; appeared for this body before the Greater Durban Boundary Commission, Chairman of the Vishnu Temple, Sea Cow Lake. Repstd. Natal at various sessions of the S.A.ILC. Conferences held mo many parts of the Union, Repstd. Natal at the All-India National Congress at |ahoare, in 1909-10. Was a keen sportsman, playing both tootball and cricket} Was a member of the Yorkshire F.C, and Crimson League F.C., played centre-half and later goalkeeper. Was the organiser of the first football team to Johannesburg, 1899, and was once prominently associated with organising interdistrict matches ; holds many posts as an official of sporting bodies. Is the donor of the Panday Bros.’ Shicld for Natal cricket, and a Cup for Natal tennis championship. Addvess: (Rcs.) 253, Sparks Rel., Phone Ovpt. 3264 ; Overport, Durban. Naual, PARBHOO, Bhoola ; b. Vankaner, dist. Surat 1887; cdwe. Vankaner. Came to South Africa in 1902, first stayed in Durban, subsequent- ly settled in foharines- burg. Opened business as merchant tailor in. 1905, and through in- dustry and ability has made it one of the Jargest businesses in this class in Johannes- burg. Has also opened firm of clothing manu- facturer and is pro- prictor of a silk store in Johannesburg. Public activities; v.-chairman, Bespoke Tailoring Employers’ Union; member, Industrial Council for Bespoke ‘failoring ; is a highly respected’ member of the Indian community. address » 39, Market St., Phone 33-7923, Johannesburg, Transvaal. THE AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 117 PARBHOO, Dajee, merchant; 6. India. Trades as a gencral dealer at Maizefield ; long connected with business. Public ac- fivities A member of the Transvaal Praja- pati Assocn. Address : P.O. Maizefield, Trans- vaal, PAREKH, Zinabhai Velji; |b. Kachholi (India) ; edue, Gandavi High School. Came to South Africa in 1914. In 1916 entered Goy- ernment service (Postal Dept.), joining non- European section of the G.P.O. He retired in 1919, rejoining in 1927. Secty., Hindu Crematorium Com- mittee; secty,, ‘Trans- vaal Hindu Siva Samaja Was member S.AJ.C. executive; v.-presdt., T.1IC.; leading figure in practically all public movements, <fddress : Transvaal. PARSOTTAM, Ruder, merchant; 6. Jalalpor, dist, Surat, 1901; educ. Jalalpor. Arrived in South Africa in 1916, settled in the Transvaal. After a period of service, started own business of general dealer at Groot Vlei, dist Bethal. Public acttvities : Is a stalwart of the Prajapati Assocn. in the Transvaal, and keen on social reforms and educational pro- gress of his group. Address; P.O. Box 58, Trichard, fransvaal. P.O. Box 245, Johanne PARUK, Esmail Mohamed; 6, Kathor, dist, Surat, ¢. 1867. Arrived in) Durban 18840 from Mauritius with merchandise. A year afterwards opened store im West Street (retail, then wholesale), eventually developing one of the biggest business houses in th> Province, part from commerce, extended his interests in industry, taking controlling share, and afterwards — pro- prictor, of the Glendale Sugar Mill and the Inanda Tea Estate, and is one of the largest employers of Indian labour. While not seeking the limehght of publicity, has becn interested in Indian affairs encouraging both with money and advice. Was chairman of Prince of Wales’ Keception Committee and had the honour of being addressed by His Royal Highness imi Hindustani. © When ff RI. Prince George wosited Durban, he presided at the Natal Inchan Congress banquet at the Drill Hall, Durban, 1934. During the Rt. Hou. Srintwasa Sastri’s term of office as Agent-General to the Government of India in South Africa, placed his house in Curne Koad at the disposal of the then Agent-General. He is the trustee of innumerable public and private trusts, including the Surat Anjuman Islam and Juma Masgid, the Anjuman Islamic Madressa and an official of many societies. Clubs Orient. dddress - 76, Commercial Rd., Phone Central 392. (Res.) 383, Currie Kd., Phone Central 8592, Durban, Natal. PARUK, Mohamed Fbrahim ; 6. ‘Xathor, Jan. 1, 1905; ¢. 5. of BR. G. Parnk, wholesale merchant. edue. Car- hsle Street. Govern- ment Indian School. On leaving school cn- tered father’s business, with which he js con- nected. Public activi- fies 2 Secty., Muslim Literary Society (founded by the late Khwaja NKamul-udin, when he visited Durban, 1926); seety., Crescent Debating Socicty \ keen sportsman did much to cncourage sports among Crmazinto Muslims, occupying position of joint secre- tary of the Muslim Sporting Club, Umainto. wlddeess : (Bus,.) 43, Queen St., Phone Central 734, (Res.) 46, First Avenue, Phone Central 735, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 3

118 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PARUK, Suleman Mamoojee; 0. s. of Mamoojee Mahomed Paruk, brother of E. M. Paruk, well known merchant; & Durban, 1902; educ. Carlisle Street Government Indian School, Durban. On leaving school went to India where he stayed for 4 years. On return to Durbanin 1923, became connect- ed with the wholesale firm of E. M. Paruk, merchants, Publec ac- tivities: Joint treas. of the South African Indian Congress ; committee member of Nata! Indian Congress ; holds official position of many societies; keenly interested in the progress of the Indian com- munity. Club: Muslim. Address : 76, Commercial Rd., Phone C. 392, Durban, Natal. PATEL, Bhailal Mathoorbhai; 8. Dharmaj, @ist. Baroda, May 5, 1887; educ. Dharmaj and Petlad High School ; m. Jhaverbai, d. of Moti- bhai Ishwarbhai Patel, of Nadiad; 2s. Came to South Africa on Dec. 12, 1903. First stayed in Maritzburg, took up commercial career. In 1918 re- moved to Durban, where he has been resident ever since. Public activities : Dates since 1905; secty. of the Reception Committee during the visit of Bhai Parmanand, to Maritzburg. Engaged in the public life of Maritzburg, including the Passive Resistance movement in 1913; foundation member of the H.Y.M.A., Maritzburg. In Durban has taken an increasingly important part, became member of the N.C. since its resuscitation—member of the executive, treas., v.-presdt. ; joint treas. of the S.A.L.C. ; secty. of the Gandhi Library and the Parsee Rustomjee Hall since 1925; member of the executive since its inception in 1921; did much to encourage the student section to make use of the library and was also responsible for starting a women's day at the library ; treas., Sir Kurma Reddi Unemployment Committee, Indian Child Welfare, and Bombay Presidency Hindu Assocn. ; chairman, Hindu Cre- matorium Society; chairman, Hindu Shamshan Fund: chairman, Anglo-Gujarati School; presdt., S.A. Hindu Maha Sabha. Trustee of the Arya Prithinidi Sabha of Natal. Treas. of the Society for the Advancement of Indian Culture. In 1914 organised and was mainly instrumental in South Africa for the starting of the dispensary at Dhramaj. dddvess : (Res.) 156, Victoria St., Phone Central 1988, Tel add., “Jayant,” Durban, Natal. PATEL, Bhikhabhai Kasanjee ; 2. Umrakh, dist, Navasari, Baroda State; educ. Union High School, Surat. First came (a South Africa in 1905, landing at Durban. Went to Transvaal (Johannes- burg) returning to Durban, 1907, where he was engaged i fruit forwarding trade. Publie activities ; One of founders of Surat Hindu Assocn.; secty., Durban Indian Fruit- erers’ Assocn. Returned Johannesburg, later taking up employment as clerk, then starting in silk trade, later interesting himself in wholesale fruit and produce business. Now representing the New India Agsurance Co., Johannesburg. Was one of founders ‘Transvaal United Patidar Society ; hon. secty., Trans- vaal British Indian Assocn.; hon. secty., Hindu Crematorium Committee ; hon. secty., Umrakh Sudrirak Samaj; auditor, Seva Samaj. During 1925 was in India where he was chairman of reception committee of Supa Educational Society's Conference ; was member S.A.LC. Deputation against Class Areas’ Bill to the then Viceroy, Lord Reading; member Gangadhara High School Governing Council; correspondent on South African Indian Affairs to Director of Statistics, Baroda State: was officer-in-charge of reliefs, ad- ministering funds of two lakhs of rupees for migratory (Hizartees) farmers who left British territory during non-payment-ol-taxes campaign from 1930 until he left India. On return to South Africa in 1933 immediately took part in local activities. Was first treas., Indo-European Joint Council; v.-presdt., T.1LC. Was onc of those responsible for the planning of the building scheme of the Patidar Society. A great admirer of Mahatma Gandhi working with him both in India and South Mrica. dddvess 64, Diagonal St., Phone 33-4478, Johannesburg, ‘Transvaal. PATEL, Baboobhai Dahyabhai, B.Sc. ; 5, Dharmaj, Baroda State, Aug. 20, 1909; educ. Dharmaj High School and Koyal Institute of Science, graduated Bachelor of Science, of the Bombay University. Kirst came to South Africa in 1925; after short stay returned for purposes of study. Re-entered Union 1932 and taught at the Potchefstroom Indian Govt. School ; now teaching at Jo’burg. An active cricketer ; secty Potchefstroom Cricket Club. Hobby: Reading. Address : Ferreira Town Government Indian School, Johannesburg, Transvaal. , THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WILO'S WHO 119 PATEL, Dayaljee Bhikhabhai; b. Waradi (Surat), Feb. 10, 1906 ; educ, Navasari. Came to South Africa with father in 1917, settling in the Transvaal. Was first in private em- ployment. In 1927 joined as partner firm of the Sindhi Silk House. Now employed at The Japan Bazaar. Keen sportsman ; man- ager, Hindu Young Men’s Cricket Club; treas., Sarcenct Lawn Tennis Club; secty., Katha Vibhag Lund Committce ; committee member IWori Hith Virdak Mundal, Johannesburg. 4ddress ; The Japan Bazaar, 45, Rissik St., Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Goolam Hoosen ; 0a. s. of late Hajee Mahomed Patel, formerly of Heidelberg, died in Durban; 6. fKholvad, 1886; edie, Kholvad. Came to South Africa in 1910, first stayed in Nlerks- dorp. In 1914 returned to India ; coming back in 1917 took up resi- dence at Bloemhof, where managed the firm of Mohamed Ismail & Co. Started own business in Ma- guassi, 1918 ; in 1922 opened a branch at Wolmaransstad; hag since started several other branches in the district. Public acheihes > was secty. of the Kholvad Islamic Club, 1914-16. IKeenly interested in all public affairs, and is regarded as one of the leading Indians of the district. <lddress : Box 6, Phone 6, Marquassi, Transvaal. PATEL, Ismail Amod; b, Wholvad, dist. Surat, 1886; educ. Kholvad. One of the pioneer Indians, came to South Africa in 1882; settled first at Pretoria. later removed to Klerksdorp and eventually to Bloemhof. In 1886 started own business in Pretoria, in firm name of Mahomed [smail and Co. In 1908 transferred business interests to Bloemhof, trading in same firm name, This business he has developed into the leading Indian general dealers’ frmin the dist., with a large European clientele. Has added three branch stores, all im the Bloemhof district. Pable interests ; ‘Look part in 1914 passive resistance move- ment under Mr. Gandhi; chairman, Bloemhof Indian community and prominentty assocated with all matters affecting the Indians in his district. He was, with others, responsible for starting the Madressa Anjuman Islam of Kholvad. Is highly respected by all sections of the community of Bloemhof. Address’: P.O. Box 33, Phone 8, Bloemhof, Transvaal. PATEL, Govindbhai Gosaibhai; &. Rayam, dist. Bardoli, Surat, 1895, educ. Kayam, Came to South Africa in 1915, took up private employment at New Clare, Started own business as fruiterer and grocer at Johan- nesburg in 1920. Re- turned IJnclia 1922 and came back Dec., 1924, starting business at Roodepoort as partner in firm of Ganda Jadoo and Co., the Bombay House, with which he is still connected, Pubhe work : Treas., Roodepoort Hindu Seva Samaj; treas., Roodepoort Indian Property Defence Fund ; associated with all public movements affecting the Indian com- munity. Address Ganda, Jadoo and Co,, 24, Station St., Phone 140, Box 18, Roodepoort, Transvaal. PATEL, Hajee Essop Ismail ; 6 Kosamba, near Surat, March 10, 1877. First in the Baroda Raj (State) Civil Service, and well known to the House of the Gaekwar, Came to Natal about 1896, accepted employment in Durban. In 1902 proceeded to Johannes- burg, where opened retail and wholesale business, soon develop- ing it into one of the largest Indian firms in the Transvaal, with business connections in East Africa, Rhodesta and Mauritius, Now proprietor of M. Jussub, wholesale soft good merchants, Public work; Chairman, Reception Committee of the S.A.1.C. Conference held in Johannesburg, 1919; a strong supporter of cducation, having donated £1,000 to the erection of the Government Indian School, Johannesburg; 10,000 rupees towards the Surat Students’ Hostel ; a generous giver to all charit- able requests, including a large sum of moneyt o the Hospital and Free Dispensary at Kosamba, and for a bursary available for post-matric. studies at the Bombay University. Actively engaged in all matters connected with the welfare of the Indians of the country, and is highly respected by all sections of the community, Address : 49, Market St., Phone 33-1516, Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 4

120 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PATEL, Ishwarbhai Becharbhai ; 6, Dhar- maj, India, 1884 ; educ. Dharmaj Government School and at Petlad. On completion of schooling came to South Africa, settling in Johannesburg. After term of private employ- ment, opened with partners, firm of I, C. Ashabhai, silk mer chants and importers. The firm had a small beginning, but is now one of the leading In- dian firms in Johannes- burg. Went to Japan in 1930, opened exporting ofhce at Yokohama and later at Kobe. In 1933 opened business at Bombay. Returned to South Africa, November, 1933, and was in charge of the Johannesburg firm. = Public work ; Was treas., Transvaal Indian Congress and South African Indian Congress; in Japan a member of the India Club; member of the Indian Silk Assocn., Japan ; is keenly interested in all public movements affecting the welfare of the Indian community, and is a generous supporter of al! deserving funds. He is a highly respected member of Indian community of Johannesburg. -fddyess : Ga, Kort St., Phone 33-3716, Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Jasmatbhai Nanabhai ; &. Karadi, Feb, 17, 1907; edite. Pretoria. Came to S. Africa in 1918. Worked at Pretoria as book- keeper then went to Jo’burg, After period of private employment in 1927, joined as partner in the firm of Sindhi Silk House, quickly proving him- self to be an able businessman. Now employed at The Japan Bazaar, Auditor Hindu Seva Samaj (Joburg). Keen social worker. Member Young India Debating Socicty. Was chairman Young Hindu Cricket Club; secty., Transvaal Kori Hith Vardak Mundal; Council member, Witwatersrand Indian Cricket Union; ex. member T.1.C.; secty.. Hindu Crematorium Committee. Was in India 1930-31, where served in civil disobedience movement, serving terms of imprisonment totalling 74 months. -lddress : The Japanese Warehouse, 5la, Joubert St., Johannesburg, Transvaal, PATEL, Karabhai Fakirbhai; 6. [lari- pura; desé. Barcoli, 1878; educ. Haripura. Arrived in South Afri 1900 landed at East London; in i902 came to Johannesburg. in 1912 opened business, wholesale produce mer- chants, in the name of I. Ik. Patel & Co., started Patel & Sons, in Newtown, 1924, Public activities > Presdt., Transvaal United Pat- dar Society ; v.-presdt.. Transvaal British In- chan socn. | Chair- man, Hindu Crematorium Committee, v.-presdt., Hindu Seva Samaj, presdt., [laripura Shreya Sadik Mundal; treas., Transvaal Indian Congress. Tn Indta took part in the Civil Disobedicnce movement, 1921, and again in 1930, Chairman, Vaghecha Samasan Committee. ‘There are not many movements con- cerning his compatriots, with which he is not either cbrectly or indirectly connected. Has been a generous giver to the Patidar Hail and Library Scheme, Hindu Seva Samaj Gandhs Hall and Vemple Func. Address + 66, Bree St., Phone 33-6860, Johannesburg, ‘Transvaal. PATEL, Kassim Suleman, well known as I. S. Patel; b. Sanjali, dist. Broach, 1906 ; educ. Under- graduate of Bombay Mnaiversity and special- med in the study et languages, learning Persian, Urdu, Gujar- ati and English. Vor a short time on the clerical staff) of the Court of Small Causes, Bombay. Came to South Africa as an educated entrant, and is secty. of the Natal Educated Entrants’ Society. Public activities Secty., Anklesver and Mangrol District Mohammedan Assen.; with headquarters at Durban; he took an active part in its reorganisation. General secty. and life member of the Young Muslims’ Debating Suciety : committee member of the African Mushm Society for the propaga- uon of Islamic principles in South Africa ; a staunch supporter of Gujarati Literary Society. Frblications : Revolution of Ottoman Khaltfd fin Gujarati and a free lance contributor to the Gujarati Pr on social, historical and religious subjects. Address : Cc The tndian Views, 137, Grey Street, Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WWHO 12) PATEL, Kanjee Bhanabhai ; 6. KNach- hiawadi, dist. Navasari, Baroda State, 1900; ed uc Kachhiawadi, Navasari and Govern- ment Indian School, Johannesburg. Came to South Africa, 1913. After cducation took control of father’s busi- ness (13. N. Patel, wholesale fruiterers and produce dealers). A staunch admirer of Ma- hatma Gandhi, and during latter's fast of May, 1933, underwent sympathetic fast in Johannesburg. Public activities «past treas., Transvaal Umted) Patidar Society ; treas., Hindu Crematorium Committee + committee member, ‘Lransvaal Indian Congress ; asst. secty., Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; executive member. Nachhiawadi Yavak Mundal. elddress > 39, President St., Box 7139, Johannesburg, ‘Vransvaal. PATEL, Maganlal Ishwerbhai; b. Dhramaj, Baroda State, India; — edue. Dhramal. Came to South Africa m 1911, settled in the Vrans- vaal. Started own business at) Zwart- ruggens in the firm name of K. and M. Patel & Co. in 1916. Success in this business Ied to opening whole- sale establishment of B. KK. Chunibhai & Co, in Johannesburg, im 1920. On closing this down, started Patel Agencies (Pty.), Ltd., with partners in 1927; on reconstruction a few years later, admitted B. AM. Desai as joint director. Publee activities : Was chairman of the Reception Commuttee during the visit of the Baroda Girl Guides ; patron of the Hindu Cricket Club member of the Vedant Service Society ; executive member of Hindu Seva Samaj. Is of a progressive outlook and keen on education. Made several visits to India. -Iddress - Ja, Kort St., P.O. Box 6092. Phone 33-2081, Tel. address: ‘Maganlal,”’ Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Kanjeebhai Bkikhabhai; 6. Satem, dist, Surat, 1893; ede. Satem. On arrival in South Africa settled in Durban; — started business as frnit ex- potter and produce dealer. Public activi- les » Member, Natal Indian Congress ; member of the Hindu Maha Sabha; v.-presdt., Hindu Youth League ; Committee member, Surat) Hindu Educa- tional Society and Surat Ilindu Associa- tion. Address: Har- govan Building, 21, Cross St., Durban, Natal. PATEL, Muljibhai Girdharbhai (known as Mulji G. Patel}; b. Dharmaj, dist, Petlad (Baroda) August 18, 1878; educ. Baroda High School, matricu- lated 1898 (Bombay University). Came to South Africa 1902, starting work as book- keeper with various firnis ; also interpreter, translator, general and estate agent. At one time or another was connected with many classes of business. Was proprietor of Bombay Warehouse (sill); a director S. African Co-op Prudential Fstates, Ltd. Chief and sole agent for Indian business of National Mutual Lue Assocn. of Australasia, Ltd. Jo’burg. iver sinee arrivalin S Africa has taken part in public affairs. One of the early associates of Mr. Gandhi, helping him open his legal office in Johannesburg. Member of Transvaal British tndian \ssocn. {(joint- secty. with Mr.H.S. 1. Pollak}. One of the petitioners to Parliament for removal of restrictions of Gold Jaw in 1919 which resulted in Act 37 of I91y. Was member deputation to Viceroy (lord Reading) in 1922 in con- nection with South African disabilities. Dunng passage of Class Areas Dill took part m opposition to this measure and greatly helped Vaddison deputation in its investigation of South African affairs. Was a Transvaal representative to S.A.C. Conferences for many years, Was one of founders (chairman 5 years) of the Hindu Crematorium in Johannesburg—one of best known institutions of its kind in South Africa. Greatly interested in all public movements for ad- vancement of the community. .Iddress - 6, Kort St., Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 5

122 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PATEL, Mahomed Ismail; only son of 1. A. Patel; 8. Simlak, dist, Surat, Jan., 1908 ; educ. Simlak and Gov- ernment Indian School at Johannesburg. After schooling joined father’s business at Springs. ‘Transferred interests to Witbank, becoming a partner in 1924. In 1929 opened branch at Belfast, which he is managing. One of the leading businesses in the town, having large Europeancustom, Public activities Secty., Bel- fast Sporting Club. Yakes leading part in all matters; affecting Indians in the district. Hobby ; Reading. address : P.O. Box 65, Phone 46, Belfast, Transvaal. PATEL, Naranbhai Madhavbhai; 56. Varad, 1886; cdc. Varad. Came to the Transvaal in 1901; in 1910 started as whole- sale produce merchant. Public activities : Treas. Transvaal United Pati- dar Society ; ex-presdt., Transvaal Hindu Cre- matorium Committee ; Presdt., Varad Samaj, which maintains an English school at Varad vice-presdt , Transvaal Indian Congress. A large donor to the Paticdar Society Hall and Library, and thc Seva Samaj (temple, library and school) Building Scheme. Address : P.O. Box 2450 37a, President St., Phone 33-2351, Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Nathoobhai Mawijee (trading as M. L. Patel); 6. Vankaner, Bardoli, Surat, 1887; educ. Vankaner, Navasari. Came to South Africa, 1903, proceeding to Johannesburg, where started fruit and produce business in 1910 in firm name of M. F.. Patel, which is one of leading Indian fruit and produce dealing firms in the city. Took part in passive resist- ance movement under Mr. Gandhi and was sentenced to two weeks’ imprisonment in L908. Public achvilies : Ex-treas., Vankaner Sarvajanik Mundal. Keen supporter of all public activities for welfare of Indian community. Has donated a large sum of money for the crection of the Tvl. United Patidar Society hall and library, and is a generous donor to funds of the Tvl. Seva Samaj. Address : 37, President St., Box 7234, Phone 33-6039, Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Naranbhal Madhav ; b. Palshod, dst. Bar- doli, Surat, 1902; educ. Palshod. Came to South Africa, 1915, being first in service in Johannesburg. In 1918 returned to India, coming back to South Africa in 1920, entered service again. Returned India, 1924, came back in 1925 and started business, joining the firm of Ganda Jadoo & Co., the Bombay House, general dealers, Roodepoort. Resigned partnership and went back to India in 1929, returning to South Africa in 1930, rejoming Ganda Jadoo and Co., with which he is still connected. Is also a partner im the Standard Trading Co., Vrededorp, Johannesburg. Public work : Secty, of Roodepoort Hindu Seva Samaj ; secty., Palshod Saravajnik Mundal. iddress < Ganda Jadoo and Co., 24, Station St., Phone 140, Box 18, Roodepoort, ‘Transvaal. PATEL, Naranbhai Ramjee ; §. Varad, Bardoli, Surat, 1887 ; educ, Varad. Came to South Africa in 1905 and started general dealer's business under name of Patudac Traul- ing Co. Retired from partnership to open wholesale fruit and pro- duce business in firm name of N. P. Patel & Co., with which he is still connected. Public activities Was one of those engaged under Mr. Gandhi in opposi- tion to ‘Yransvaal regis- tration and was sentenced to 14 days’ imprisonment ; was) v-presdt., Transvaal Indian British Assocn, In India he took part im civil disobedience movement, in 1921, being leader of Bardoli District Volunteer Corps. In second Indian civil disobedience campaign which took form of non-payment of taxes as protest, he jeft British territory for Hizarat, forfeiting his properties. Past presdt., Transvaal United Patidar Society ; ex-chairman, Sat Sadhik Mundal ; committee member, Hindu Crematorium ; v.-chairman, Transvaal Indian Congress ; Frequent donor to Patidar hall and library funds ; an officer of the Varad Samaj, which maintains an Lnglish-medium school in the village of Varad. ddvess : 36, President St., Phone 33-5523, Johannesburg, ‘Transvaal, For ather names, see Unelassified List at the end of this section, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 123 PATEL, Odhavbhai Raghebhai; 6. Varad, 1888; edue. Varad. Came to South Africa 1905, settled in Jo- hannesburg. Started fruit and produce busi- ness and in 1923 started farming and general dealer's busi- ness at Warmbaths, came back to fohannes- burg in 1933, now principal of O. R. Patel & Co. Public activities ; Former chairman of the Trans- vaal United Patidar Society ; committee member of the Transvaal British Indian Assocn. , member of the T.1.C.; was chairman of the Varad Sarvaganic Mundal, and was one of those responsible for starting an English School at Varad. Interested in all public affairs of the community. Address ¢ 33, President St., Box 5390, Phone 33-2092, Johannes- burg, Transvaal. PATEL, Ookabhai Madhavji; 6. Satem, dist. Surat, 1886; educ. Satem. Came to South Africa 1906, settling in Johannesburg where has been resident throughout, Started own business as fruit merchant in Johannesburg, 1906. Has flourishing business under his own name of O. M. Patel. Public acttytlies + Member, Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj; member, Transvaal United Patidar Society. look part in passive resistance movement, under Mr. Gandhi, serving term of imprisonment. Interested m education, spending large sums of money. Has been a generous donor to all deserving movements. «Address : Diagonal St., Phone 33-6571, Johannesburg, vaal. PATEL, Rama Naran; b. Siker, 1912; edue. Stker, Varad and Gov- ernment School, Jo- hannesburg. Came to South Africa when a boy with parents, settling in Johannes- burg. After school joined produce — busi- ness; now a_ partner in the firm of B. N, Patel, fruit and pro- duce merchants. Mem- ber of the Hindu Young Men's Debating Society. Interested in all public affairs. Address: 39, President St., Phone 33-2969, Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATEL, Ranchodjee Kasanjee; 6. Umrakh, dist, Navasari, Baroda State, 1909; edue, Um- rakh. Came to South Africa in 1920) with his father, settling m Johannesburg. Opened own business in part- nership in Louis Trich- ardt, trading in firm name of the Surat Trading Co., which he is still! conducting. A member of the ‘Tramns- vaal United Patidar Society and a generous donor towards the erec- tion of the Patidar Hall, Johannesburg. Has also generously contributed to the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj building scheme, and in India to the Hindu Anath Ashram, Nadiad, and the Louis Trichardt Crematormim. -lddress : P.O, Box 10, Louis Trichardt, Transvaal. PATEL, Somabhai Vithalbhai ; 4. Band- hani, Baroda State; educ. Anglo-Vernacular School, Petlad, Bareda High School and Baroda College ; mat- riculated 1899, then joined college, leaving before graduation Employed for a period as teacher in a Bombay Municipal School, Stayed in Calcutta at the Ramkrishna Math, Belur, with the workl- renowned Swami Vive- kananda, In 1904 ar- rived m Durban; for a while worked for The Indian Opinion, Durban, and also taught. Since 1905, with brief visits to India, has been in the Transvaal, working as a bookkeeper ; also engaged in business, as a partner in the firm of LL. S. D. Patel & Ca., general dealers, Johannesburg, which firm has since been closed. Puble activities : Took active part in the passive resistance struggle of 1907 and '8, suffering 3 months’ hard labour in the Volksrust and Houtpoort gaols. Those in gaol at the same time with him included M. K. Gandhi, Parsec Rustomjee and others whom he entertained with songs, being a singer of some ability, Mr. Gandhi, in one of his early works, “My Jail Experiences, Part 1." makes reference to him (the subject of this sketch) as a singer, Collected a fund of 5,000 rupees in South Africa to start a dispensary in the village of Bandhani, which since is being run by the State. In 1909 started a Students’ Assocn., of which he was the presdt., doing social service at Bandhani. This body was responsible for the management of a library, conducting lectures, etc. Address : P.O. Box 48, Carolina, Trans- vaal.

---

## Page 6

124 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PATEL, Tribhovan- das Girdharbhai ; 6. Dharmaj ; dist, Petlad, Baroda, Aug., 1881; educ. Petlad and Baroda. In 1993 came to Jo- hannesburg, where was first in employment, and in J910 started with partners, Ishwar- bhai Becharbhai and Ashabhai Taverbhai- wholesale silk and general business, which to-day is one of the biggest Indian concerns in Johannesburg, with branches at Kobe and Bombay. This firm had a romantic rise, the partners among them only has Is. 3d, in cash on the opening day, and it was the joint combination of industry and enterprise that contributed to its success. Public work > Was treas., S.ALLC. and T.LC.; v.-presdt., Transvaal Indian Commercial Assoen.: patron of the Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj ; was presdt., Transvaal Hindu Crematorium Committec, ete. A generous giver to all public appeals. Address ; 6, Kort St., Phone 33-3716, Johannesburg, ‘Transvaal. PATEL, Valabhai Bhagabhai. Sec under “V" PATEL, Valabhbhai Bhawan; 0b. Kach- hiavadi, dist. Navasari, Feb. 5, 1905; 9 edue. Kachhiavadi, Came to South Africa in 1918, settled in Johannes- burg. After a short stay went back to Indta in 1920, re- turned 1924. In the same year started own business as fruiterer, went back to India a year after- wards. Came back 1927 recommenced business in the firm name of Navasari ‘Trading Co., 79, Grant Avenuc, Norwood, After a short stay returned to India; coming back in 1930, opened the firm of Bhawan Khanjee Patel, 33, Tresident Sireet. In 1932 started business in own name at 40, President Street, which he is now con- ducting. Member of the Kachhiawadi Yuvuk Mundal ; member, Hindu C.C., Johannesburg. Takes an interest in all public matters. 4ddy » 40, President St., Johannesburg, Transvaal. PATHER, P. Ruth- nam, land and estate agent; 6. Mauritius. Came to Natal when achild ; edie. Durban, and Indian High School, Pietermaritz- burg and private study. Joined firm of Pather & Co., land and estate agents, eventually be- coming its proprietor, Public actturtres Former joint secty . NLC. SAL. Indo- European Joint Council, Indian ‘Technical and Continuation ¢ és, Hindu Tamil Institute; member of the Colonial-Born and Settlers’ Indian Assocn.; trustee of the R. WK. Nhan’s Medical Aid ‘Trust; official of several other organisations. ddress: (Res.) 42, Hampson Grove, Phone C. 4334. (Bus.) Baker St., Phone C 298], Durban, Natal. PATIDAR, Rancho- jee Valjee ; 6. Siker, Bardoli (Surat), 1891; educ. Higher Grade Govt. School, Durban, Came to Durban from India, 1905. After schooling engaged in business, going to Jo- hannesburg in 1908. Started fruit business in Johannesburg, later opening general dealer's business in name of R. Patidar Trading Co., (established 1913), with which is at present connected, A prominent worker in all public movements, especially social reform. Presdt.. Tvl. Hindu Seva Samay, a body responsible for the erection of the Indian Ward. Johannesburg General Hospital. Is now undertaking big building scheme: Gandhi Hall, library, temple, etc. Was first secty., Surat Patidar Assocn. in 1909 (later se of Transvaal United Patidar Socty. in 1914); secty., Hindu Crematorium since 1910. First established and was secty. of Siker Guanottejak Mundal. In India in 19t0 took part in civil disobedience and in 1923 was imprisoned for one year for flying National flag at Nagpur. lounded Patidar Yuvuk Mundal, which established the Patidar Boarding Llouse for students at Surat. Seety., Bardoli Yhalukar Samiti in 1922. In 1925 was delegate to All-India Congress at Gaya and Belgram, Member Bardoli Thalukar local Board from 1925-26. For educational purposes in India collected large sums money ; first 15,000 rupees in 1916 for Patidar Boarding House at Surat and, in 1921, collceted 33,000 rupees for Supa Central School; £2,000 for Tilak Swaraj Fund in 1920, Publications: Patiday Soobod Sangra aud contributes to Gujarati periodicals. Address ¢ 4, Pritchard St., Phone 33-4014, Johannesburg, Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHOS WHO 1 bt on PATHER, Vythilinga Soobramania Coopoo- samy, Commissioncr of Oaths, 1934: h, Kimberley, June 2, 1887: edie. Uigher Grade Government Indian School, under late [. B. E. Conolly, passe] Collective and Bursary Examination conducted by the Fda- cation Department open to Europeans and Indians, first class, hele 41st position out of 397 competitors ; am. Thanalutchmee, d. of late P. A. Pather; 3s., 3d. Occupation: first as clerk in European whole- sale office, Jater clerk land and estate agent's office, etc. Founded the firm of Pather & Co., Land and Estate Agents, resigned 1929. Started own business in name of V. S.C. Pather & Son, 1929, Government *Valuator; is a Sworn Translator of Tamil language of the Supreme Court of South Africa (Natal Provincial Division). Public achertre Commenced since 1914: Deputy President, recipient of the King’s Silver Jubilee Medal, 1935; v.-presdt., Indian National Progressive Assocn.; joint secty., Natal Indian Congress, which was resuscitated in 1919; gencral secty., S.A.LC., was in personal charge of Mrs. Sarojini Naida’s tour throughout South Africa and Rhodesia. In 1926 member of the first South African Indian Congress deputation to India in connection with the Class Areas Bill; member of the Standing Committee at Cape Town, appointed to assist the Habibullah Delegation, 1927 and Mazli Hussain Delegation, 1932 ; vice-president. N.LC. Has led many deputa- tions before Provincial and Union Government Select Committees; one of the best known figures in Indian public life. A keen ceducationalist, and also a strong supporter of vernacular cducation ; one of founders of the Hindu Tam) Institute, was trustee and now its school manager. Takes prominent part in social and other activities ; chairman of Council of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha. Publications : Was acting editor of The vha Bhanoo, Durban; former social and religious editor of The Sentamil Selvan and many Congress statements, etc., the lust thing being the statement on Indian Colonisation before the Colomsation Inquiry Com- mittee. Address > (Res.) Sarojini Villa, 26, Beatrice St. (Bus.) 15, Foundry Lane, Vhone 3373, P.O. Box 1280, Durban, Natal, PEER, Ahmed Cassim ; 2a s. of B.C. Ebrahim, 4, Dannhauser. Aug. 8, 1903; educ. Ladysmith, On Jeaving school joined father’s business at Glencoe, the leading firm of general dealers, with which he is still connected. Also durector of Peer Cassim Ebrahim, & Sons (Vty.), Ltd., Glencoe. Publi actlutios : Was chairman of the reception committee responsible for the visit of Sir and Lady Maharaj Singh to Glencve ; trustec of the Giencoe Indian School Society ; chairman of the Dundee Mosque and Macdressa Trust. Preset. of the Dundee and District Incian Chamber of Com- meree } ex-seety. of the Northern Natal Chamber of Commerce. -lddress 2 PLO. Box 3, Phone 3. Tel. address: “Peer,’’ Glencoe Natal. PEER, Suleman Cassim: 4th ss. of Cassom Ebrahim Peer, merchant, of Glencoe Junction, Natal. 6. Natal, 1908. Visited India, year 1913-13; educ. Dundee, Lady- smith and Durban. Joined the business of Bateman (Pty.). Lid., in the vear 1928, at the age of 20 vears, and of which he is a man- aging director today, and also has an interest in the firm of Messrs. Peer Cassim Ebrahim & Sons (Pty.j, Ltd. at Gleneoe, Tn 1935 established an agency business in partnership. in the name of The Indo-African Trade Agency, with its head office at Dundee, ‘The company represents as sole agents for the Umion and its mandated territories leading Indiaw manu- facturers. ‘The conipany’s great desire is to extend trade relationship on a very large scale between the two countrics. namely India and South Africa, and within few months of commencement the company had been successful in booking several thousand sounds of indents. Public activines : “Trustee, Dundee Mosgue and Madressa Islimia Trust: presdt., Dundee & District Indian AntieT.B. Cammittee; patron, Jundee & District Indian Football Assocn.: one of the three Indians of Dundee invited to a civic lunch- con given by the Town Council on the occasion of the visit of the Agent for the Government of India, Wunwar Siv Maharay Singh. 4ddress PLO. Box 14, Phone 123. “Pel. address. “Indent.’ Dundee, Natal. PILLAY, Amroo- tham ; wife of K. KK. ‘tllay, Greenwood Park ; &, Maclras, 1885. Came to South Africa when a girl of 4 years, with her parents. On her marriage, helped greatly in building the business started by her Vusband. Through her own cfforts saved a arge sum of money, which she gave for the crection of a portion of the Hindu Temple at Umgeni Road, Dur- ban. Has been a generous giver to re- ligious and other purposes, She is a popular hostess and is widely respected by a large circle of acquaint- ances and friends. Accompanied her husband twice tolndia. Cheldven : 7daughtersand6sons. dddress : Greenwood Park, Natal,

---

## Page 7

126 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHOS WHO PETERS, Maurice R., M.B., Ch.B. (Edin.); educ. Maritzburg, Durban, S.A.N C., Fort Hare, and Edin- burgh University; presdt., Pietermaritzburg branch of the South African Colonial and Settlers’ Indian Assocn.; member Schools’ F.C. and C.C. Address : 458, Longmarket St., Phone 3375, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. PILLAY, Candasamy Balakrishna; 6. Ke- union, near Durban, Sept. 9, 1889; duc. Higher Grade Indian School, Wurban and Maritzburg. Leaving school engaged in busi- ness. Came to Trans- vaal 1911, a year later entered Postal Dept., as clerk at the Post Office, Johannesburg, After 5 years’ service trausferred, on — pro- motion, to the Presi- dent Street Post Office, Germiston. In Dec., 1918 promoted clerk- in-charge Non-European Post Office, Pretorta, he is the only Indian occupying this grade. Public work - Has devoted his time to religious and social work, one of the founders of the Melrose Hindu Temple ; member Marieammen ‘Temple, Pretoria; chairman, Pretoria Tamil Young Men’s Vedic League (1919-21) ; a founder of the Famil Vedic League School ; v-presdt., Pretoria District Inchan lootball Assocn.; member of the Institute of Kacc Relations. Hobby : Music. wlddress : Non-European Post Office, Pretoria. {Res.) 290, Asiatic Bazaar, Pretoria, Transvaal. PILLAY, Kumarsamy Krishnasamy; b. ‘Tanjore, Madras, Dec. 25, 1867. Came to South Africa in 1884. Visited Transvaal and the Cape for the pur- pose of starting bust- ness but eventually opened a general dealer’s store in Durban, 1901 ; soon after transferred interests to Greenwood Park, where is conduct- ing a successful business Public work: Repsd. Natal at S.A.1.C. Con- ferences at Cape Town, Wimberley, Johannes- burg and other places, took part in the first passive resistance movement, under Mr. M. K. Gandhi, in the Transvaal in 1908; a keen worker in the cause of the Tamil section; founder of the Greenwood Park Indian School, 25 years ago and the Ranganathan ‘Temple, Greenwood Park; trustee of the Umgent Siva Soobramanier Temple; treas., Colonial-born and Settlers’ Indian Association. Address : P.O, Box 32, Umgeni, Natal, PILLAY, Manickam; s, of Naga Pillay, a pioncer Natal Indian ; h Avoca, 1905; educ. Vamil and English, Ladysmith and = Dur- ban. In 1919 offered post as teacher at Mount Prospect Hail but preferred business. In 1920 joined the firm of Syed Rassool, old established at Lady- smith, as salesman ancl bookkeeper. 1926 com- menced own busmess at Glencoe Junction. In 1929 accepted post as a cashier and book- keeper in the well-known firm of M. M. Amod & Co, (Pty.), Ttd., Ladysmith. Publree actitles : Ardent religious and social worker ; has been seety. and auditor of the Hindu Trikootam Sabha, 1933 and 1934. One of the founders and secty. of the Glencoe Junction Football Assocn. ; and also was successful in getting a Hindu Tamil Vernacular School established at Ladysmith. Represents various football clubs and is himself a keen soccerile. .<ddress: 18, Malcolm Rd., P.O. Box 47, Ladysmith, Natal. PILLAY, Narayana Kanabathy ; 6. Kim- berley, Sept. 22, 1892 ; edic. Wesleyan Indian School, Maritzburg #2. Nellatchee, ¢. of V. S. Pillay, Pretoria. On leaving school stayed in Johannesburg, there engaged in business, first as cigar manu- facturer and later as produce merchant. [n 1922 moved to Kim- berley, starting bust- ness as market com- mission agency and retail produce, Prtblic works: Yook part in the (rst passive resistance movement in the Transvaal, 1907-10, and with other members of his family, suffered three terms of imprisonment, thereafter deported to India, 1910; returned soon after because of his colonial birth. In 1913 was also engaged in the struggle for the repeal of the £3 tax. In Kimber- ley, was former treas. of the Indian Political Assocn. ; treas., Hindu Vedic Society ; treas. of the G.W LEA, 1930, and has always been called upon to serve on all bodies concerned with [Indian public life. Represented ‘Transvaal in the Sam China Cup Tournaments, 1913. Recreation ; Cricket. Address : (Res.) 56, George St. (Bus.) Market House, Kimberley, Cape Province. —_———=— THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 127 PILLAY, Sagayah Naga ; ). Natal, 1897; educ. Durban. An ar- dent social worker. Presdt., Ladysmith Hindoo Thirookootom and Shri Ganesa Temple. Member of the Indian Welfare Society. Actively as- sociated in the uplift- ment of the poor. Member of the Natal Indian Congress. Re- presented Congress at S.A.1.C. Conference at Cape Tewn in 1925, Interested in sports ; Founder of the Northern Districts Indian Cricket Union. Presdt. of Northern Districts Cricket Union from seasons 1927-1933. V.-presdt. of the Ladysmith and District Sports Assocn. Presdt. of S.A.R. Cricket Club. Presdet. \.; Patron Schoots’ C.C. Recreation Outdoor Address : 8, Buller Rd., Ladysmith, Natal. games. PILLAY, Sundera- gasen Chocklinghum; ves. of RLS. C. Pillay, Jehannesburg ; & Dur- ban, June 23, 1907; educ. Pretoria and Gov- ernment Indian School, Johannesburg. — After school entered business, becoming manager in a large commercial firm in Bechuanaland. In 1926 came to Cape Town, where started as bookkeeper, ac- countant and general agent ; now owner of the Atrican Mercan- tile Agency ; Cape Town agent for the British India Steamship Navigation Co. Has the Government Diploma in egg testing. Public activities ; A prominent executive member of the Cape Indian Congress ; executive member of the Cape Colourcd and European Joint Council. Repstd. Cape at the South African Indian Congress conferences for many years. Repstd. Cape on the consultative exccutive to the Fazlt Hussain Delegation. Has taken part in the work of various other non-European bodies ; senior v.-presdt, and auditor of the Cape Indian Congress. An active soccer participant, founder and capt. of the Swaraj F.C. and captained various other clubs; executtve member and auditor of the Western Province Indian Football Assocn. ; secty. and treas. of the Western Province Referees’ Assocn. Auditor of the Society founded for the relief of the poor in Mecea. Member of the Cape Literary and Debating Society. Address: (Res.) 27, Chester Rd., Cape Town, PILLAY, Theya- garaja Vythilingam Rajagopal, Com- missioner for Oaths. b. Kimberley, July 11, 1898, 2eds.of TV Pillay (b. Tiruvarur, arr. Kimberley, 1887); educ. Pescod School, Kimberley ; 92. INrish- nammial, 3rd d. of J. S. sen, Cracdock, Soon after leaving school entered business in partnership with H. De Villiers, market agents. On dissolution of part- nership in 1920 took charge, retaining the firm name of H. De Villiers & Co., Mar et House, Kimberley. Public achvitres : Has taken part in every movement affecting the Indian community since 1922, when he became the secty. of the Indian Political Assocn., which post be has helc uninter- ruptedly since his first election; — secty.. Hindu Vedic Sabha; chairman, Ixhilifat Committee, 1924; executive member, S.A.0C.> presdt.. G.WIALTLA,, 1930; secty.. G.W.LF.A., 1929; trustee, Kimberley Mutual Building Society > v.-presdt., Hindu Women’s Agssoen.; joint founder, Indian Women’s Assocn. ; secty., Greengrocers’ Assocn., 1922-28. Has an uncivalled record of public service among Indians in Kimberley. [n 193] was appointed a Commissioner for Oaths, being the first Indian in the Cape to receive this distinction. -lddvess : — (Res.) 102, Jones St. (Bus.) Box 417, Market Hall, Kimberley, Cape,Province. PILLAY, Veja Na- dasen ; 6. Durban, 1901; s. of late V. Vijiarangam Pillay, of Grahamstown ; #2. in 1919 44h d. of C. M. Naidoo, Maritebure ; 5 chld.; 9 edie, Durban and Grahamstown, Commenced business career at the age of 16, and today owns and manages one of the leading crapery and outfitting businesses amongst the Indian community in the Cape. Publre activities : Secty. of the British Indian Assocn., 1921 to 1927, Was mace presdt. In 1928-35, Has represented his Assoen. at several scs- sions of the S..\.1.C. Conferences and at other important gatherings. A keen worker for the upliftment of his countrymen. He took a leading part in the erection of the British Indian Association Hall in 1934, an institution which seeks to preserve and protect the status and legitimate rights of the Indian community of the district. Hebby : Motoring, shooting and football. dddress : 23-25 High St., Phone 90. Tel. add.: “V, Pillay,” Grahamstown, Cape Province,

---

## Page 8

128 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PILLAY, Vythlin- gam Kristnasamy ; 6. Durban, May 1], 1897; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban: #2. c. s. of R. N. Moodley, Mar- itzburg. On leaving school engaged in busi- ness as fruit exporter ; now partner in the firm of Moodley’s Ser- vice Station, Miaritz- burg. Public actruttics ¢ Presdt., HY M.A. ; was presdt., Pinetown and District Indian Assocn,; was presdt., Indian Child Welfare Society, founded by Kunwarani lady Maharaj Singh, Pinctown ; foundation member of the Young Men's Vedic Assocn., Durban; acted presdt., Colonial-Born & Settlers Indian Assocn. (V.M.13. Branch); one of those responsibte for the establishment of the Govt. Indian School at Pinetown. In sport was a keen boxer, fought leading non-European heavyweights in South Africa, Holds various official positions on sporting bodies. Address» 467, Church St., Phone 3569, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. PILODIA, Suliman Hassim,; 4. Jamkam- halia, 1888 ; educ. Jamkambalia ; came to South Africa in 1904, settling in Pretoria. Then went to Middle- burg. Started own busi- ness in 1910, In 1912 went to Lydenburg. In 1919 started busi- ness in that district. In 1928 returned to Middleburg, where he is conducting a general dealer's business. Public work: Member, Middle- burg Madressa; member, Indian Assocn, In India, chairman and trustee of the Madressa, Jam- kambalia. One of the prominent Lndian businessmen in Middleburg. .tddress : Box 147, Middleburg Transvaal. rv other aa » NEE i nelas at the end of this section. POCHEE, Mahomed Amod;_ &. Kholvad, Oct. 25, 1897; ¢. s, of Amod Ebrahim Pochee; educ. Madressa Anju- man Islam, Kholvad. Came to South Africa in 1911, first stayed in Hetdelberg, Trans- vaal, A year later joined father’s busi of general dealer at Standerton. In 1930 started own business, sole proprietor of Pochee’s Cycle Works. Public activ Joint secty., C., Standerton Branch: was chairman and treas. for four years of Lhe Standerton Mosque. A keen sportsman—was captain for 12 years ot the Oitoman I. & CC, Captained the Yransvaal Kholvadians, 1919 at Krugersdorp, 1920 at New Clare and 1933 at S.A.R., Grounds, Johannes- burg. In India, in 1916-18 and 1927-29 was v.-presdt., presdt. 1921, Mahifile Saiful lslam and secty., Kholvad Islam Gymkhana ; committce member of the Mahifle Anjuman Islam, 1916-18 ; 1921-23 ; 1927-29, 1927-29 general secty. of the Madressa Anjuman Islam of Kholvad; captain Kholvad Gymkhana, 1928-29 ; 1927-29 committee member of the Iholvad Water- works. Attended the marriage of H.H. Prince Partap Singh of Baroda, 1927. Is popular with all sections of the community. Address: Cr. Market and Handel Sts., Box 123, Phone 99, Stauderton, Transvaal. POCHEE, Suleman Ahmed b. Wholvad, dist. Surat, Dee. 22, 1909 ; educ. Wathor High School and Ali- garh Intermediate Coll. (Muslim University). After matriculating passed Intermediate Arts (FOA.). On return to South Africa qual- fied as bookkeeper, passing Institute of Bookkeepers’ (Final Stage) London FE-xam. ; now studying for \c- countancy. Is engaged in commerce, being connected with the firm of Amod and Ismail. Breyten An excellent sportsman, repsd. his (University at cricket, being in Ist NI. (1929-80); an all-round player, getting his colours for batting and bowling two years in succession. Hobby : Writing Press articles. Was one of those responsible for the establishment of the Government School at Standerton, of which he was the first principal. .tddress ; P.O. Box 9, Phone 13, Breyten, ‘Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 129 PRAJAPATI, Jina- bhai Dahyabhai ; 6 Eru, Dec. 3, 1910; educ. Fru and Govt. Indian School, Johannesburg. Came to South Africa, 1919; stayed first at Johannesburg. After education took up commercial carecr, starting a bookkeeping agency. Forsome time was at Louis Trichardt, then removed to Pre- toria where jomed L. P,. Modi in partnership, the firm now known as Modi & Prajapati; they kept books for several leading Incian commercial houses in Pretoria and the ‘Transvaal. In addition was connected with the Japan Bazaar, silk merchants, Johannesburg. Now has left bookkeeping and agency. Since Dec. 1934 has carried on business in firm name of Modi and Prajpati, The Chinese Warehouse, silk& gen. merchts., Vrecledorp. Public interests : life member, ‘Trans. Hindu Seva Sama); joint-secty. and life member of Pretoria Hindu Seva Samaj; auditor of the Transvaal Prajapati Assocn, Is strongly interested in reform movement, affecting his community. 4dédvess- 427, 4th Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Transvaal. PREMABHAI, Prag- bhai ; 6. Sisodra, dist. Surat, 1890; educ. Sisodra. Came to South Africa in 1904, stayed in Natal for one year, then went to Johannes- burg, later proceeded to Krugersdorp, where he opened business as merchant tailor, his be- ing the first Indian tail- oring business in Krug- ersdorp. Has a large European clientele. Public work: One of the secretaries of the Transvaal Dargi Mundal; executive member of the Transvaal Indian Congress, former executive member of the Transvaal British Indian Assocn. ; took part in the passive resistance movement under Mr. Gandhi; chairman Krugersdorp Branch Transvaal Seva Samaj; executive member Transvaal Indian Tailoring Employers’ Assocn.; was chairman Hindu Dhrama Sabha; executive member of the All-India Dargi Assocn. Jn India took part in the National struggle and was a member of the band that broke the Salt Law at Darsana (1930); member of the All-India National Congress ; delegate to the Karachi Congress in 1931; was one of the organisers of the reception on the arrival of the Hon. Gopal Ixrishna Gokhale, when latter visited South Africa in 1912; has been a keen worker in India in cause of social reform. .fddvess : Prag Prema, Aryan ‘Tailor, 40, Market Street, Krugersdorp, Transvaal. PREMA, Lalla; 6. Palsana, 1898; educ. Palsana, Baroda State; Came to South Africa, 1914. Settled first in Johannesburg, moved to Springs and is now in Pretoria. In 1926 started firm of Prema Lalla, merchant tailors, with whom are partners, hana Ratanjee, Bhana Ruder and Vallabh Doolabh. Developed business on a_ large scale, having a number of employes. Has a_ clientele of Furopeans ; is the leading Indian tailoring firm in Pretoria, Public activities ; v.-presdt., Transvaal Praiapati Assocn. ; a keen supporter of the reform movement in_ his community ; actively interested in all public affairs. aAddvess : 171, Prinsloo St., Phone 2021, Pretoria, Transvaal, PREMA Nathoo (also known as Natha Parbhoo) ; b. Valod (resident of Varad, Bardoh, dst. Surat), 1893. Came to South Africa in 1909, settled in Johannesburg. First in service; in 1920 opened business of N. Prema, merchant tailors, Forest Hill, sub- sequently removed to present address; also wholesale woollen mer- chant. Public activities : Executive member Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj]: executive mem- ber, ‘fransvaal Indian ‘Yaitors’ Assocn.; interested in all public movements. Address ; 33b, Sauer St., Phone 33-3528, Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 9

130 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO YURMASIR, Blackie; 6. Durban, 1878; y.s. of Blackie Ram Chou- dri; educ. Boys’ Model School and Higher Grade Govt. Indian School; m. 3rd d. of Beharie Maharaj, late of Ladysmith; 8s., 5d. On leaving school was connected with brother’s firm of Dookhan Lros., Grey ville Mineral Water Works; in 1921 started own business of Dur- ban Electric Mineral Works, with which he is connected; ts also a large property ~ owner. Public activities: Member of the N.1.C.; member of Indian Hospital Advisory Committee ; v.-presdt,, Durban Arya Samaj and official of other religious and social institutions. In 1933 toured India, where he met many prominent leaders; became shareholder of the Arya Sahitya Mundal, Ltd., Ajmere. In young days keen cyclist and footballer. 4ddress : 17 and 19 May St., Phone C, 3390, Durban, Natal. + > AGA, Dulabh, R senior partner of D. Raga & Co.; 4, Alipore, Khambia, 1895; educ. Alipore. Came to South Africa with his parents, settled in Port Elizabeth, where he joined his father’s busi- ness of boot and shoe dealers. On father’s death became senior partner. Has large property interests in Port Elizabeth. Public activities Treas. and trustce, Gujarati Wshytria Mundal, of which he is one of the foundation members; committee member of the Cape Indian British Council. Address : 47, Princess St., Phone 4280, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. ; For other names, ; N at the end of thi RAHIM, Mohomed Abdul ; b. Surat, 1887, On arrival in Natal started as a bookkceper and _ sales- man. In 1922 estab- lished own busin 8 a general dealer, with which he is still con- nected. Public achvities Trustee estate Abdul Kader and Madressa Anjuman Islam. Takes a prominent part in the affairs of the com- munity. Address: P.O. Box 42, Phone 35, Port Shepstone, Natal. RAHIM, Shaikh Mo- hamed ; 6. Olpad ; dist, Surat, 1884; educe. Olpad and Bulsar. Came to South Africa early in 1900. Settled in Cape Town, engaging in commerce as gencral dealer, wholesale fruit- erer, etc. Public work : Has taken active part in all matter affecting Indians and other non- Luropeans—social, ed- ucational, municipal and Parliamentary. As soon as he arrived, he recognised need for some elementary educa- tion among the Indian community. He started a night school at his own expense and founded other similar institutions, Was among first to see the strength of an All-Union Inclian Organisation, drawing Mr, Gandhi's attention to the fact in 1907. Sub- sequently he helped in the establishment of what is now the S.A.L.C. Sponsored other conferences in the Cape to oppose anti-Indian measures in 1916 and other dates. Took prominent part in consolidating the position of Indian traders as to their licences. Asa public man he has come into contact with members of the Government and Legislature. He saw need of an Indian Agency in South Africa and submitted a statement to this effect to the Paddison Deputation in 1925. Has appeared before numerous commissions and was thanked by the Paddison and other deputations tor his infornration on Indian questions, Had consistently opposed the condonation and other schemes, which he considered would reduce the Indian population. Is secty. of the Bababia Muslim Soc. (charitable body): presdt., Market Buyers’ Assocn. ; chairman, Cape Indian National Assocn, ; was appointed leader to South African Indian Federation ; member, Colouret and Furopean — Joint-Council; member, South African Party (Peninsula) Council ; exccutive member, Inclian Traders’ Assocn. } chairman, Cape, Wynberg and District Sports Club; member, Literary and Debating Society and of other institutions. Address - 12, Chester Rd., Walmer Estate, Cape Town, ent ™, eS ———— THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 131 RAGA, Ratanjee ; jumor partner of 1). Raga & Co., b. Alipore, Khambia, 1897; edue. Alipore. Came to Port Elizabeth with his par- ents in 1910; entered father’s business, On his father’s death, the firm’s name was changed to I). Raga & Co, of which he became the junior = partner: with his brother he has joint interests in property ownership. Public actiutties: OX keen worker in the Interests of the Gujarati Kshytria Mundal, former treas. of the Mundal, and an active participant in all matters affecting the com- munity. Address : 47, Princes St., Phone 4280, Port Elizabeth, C.P. RAHIM, Abdul; 2rd 9. of late Abdul Warrim ; b&b. Vesma, Surat, 1900; ve, Vesma and Zeerust. Came, with his brother, Abdul Kader, to South Africa in 1912) and joined his father's busi- ness of A. K. Rehman, Linokano, established 40 years ago, being the oldest firm in the dis- trict and the fact that it has been permit- ted to trade in a native reserve is a proof of the high es- teem in which the firm . has been held. After father’s death became a partner, assuming proprictorship in 1924 on death of his uncle and elder brother. Has added to the spirit of con- fidence first created by the founder of the establish- ment. ‘fakes a close interest in the progress of his community and is a liberal supporter of all deserving appeals, -lddvess P.O. Linokano, via Zeerust, Transvaal. RAMGOBIN, Sheochand; 6. [nanda; 2nd 5. of Sheochand; cduc. Phoenix Settlement, conducted by Mr. ML Ix. Gandhi. Started work as a farmer, later opened business as general dealer; also engaged in passenger transport work. Public activities Chair- man of the Inanda Bus Owners’ Assocn.; a keen worker in the cause of Indian education, started the Inanda Indian Vernacular School, which has now been converted into the [nanda Government Aided School, being its School Manager During the passive resistance movement of 1913, worked at the Gandhi Settlement, A supporter of all movements directed towards the advancement of his community in the Inanda district. dddress P.O, Inanda, Natal. RAI, Anand; 6. Phoenix, Natal, Oct. 16, 1883; ¢. s. of late Tiloki; educ. Boys’ Model School, Durban. and private study, uncer Dr. ‘1. C. Loram, then Inspector of Schools, Coast,and now Professor of Education, Yale University. On leaving school joined Natal Goverment Rail- way service, a few months later trans- ferred as teacher on the staffof the Railway Government Indian School, which has since changed to the Depot Road Government Indian School, the largest primary school in Natal. Education, tf may be said, is both his profession and his hobby, for all his pubhe activities have been centred round his work, Was one of the founders and the first presdt. (twice), now life v.-presdt. of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society. Appeared before the Russell Commission, the Provincial Inquiry Committee on Vernacular Fducation and the Natal Provincial Inquiry on Indian Education, 1928, and as presdt. led a number of deputations before the Education Department, 1s the oldest Indian principal employed in Government Indian schools in Natal. Was secty. to the H.R.H. the Prince of Wales’ Reception Com- mittee ; member of the Indo-European Joint Council, and the only Indian representative of the non- European Carnegie fabrary Committce, v-presdt. Durban Indiin Club. .tddvess: (Res.} 120, Kenilworth Rd., Sydenham, (Bus.) Depot Road Government Indian School, Durban Natal, RAJCOOMAR, Ramlall; 6 Ghazi- pur, United Province. Came to South Africa, April 4, 1875, settled in Durban, After pri- vate employment, started own business as cartage contractor, with which he is still connected. Is a large property owner. Public activiNes . a trustee of the Shree Vishnu Temple, Durban ; trustee of Rastria Pat- sala, Clairwood ; com- mittee member of the Gokhale’s Memorial Hall, Tongaat. Is a highly respected member of the Indian community. Visited Europe in 1934. Made several trips to Indta. .tddress - (Res.) 43, Station Ra, Phone Stamford 3310. (Bus.) 31, May St., Phone C. 1694, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 10

132 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO RAMCHAND, Gur- dasmal, also known as R. G. Teikameas ; b. Hyderabad, Sind, 1879; educ. Hydera- bad; 3rd s, of late Gurdasmal. Arrived in South Africa in 1897, first staying in the Transvaal, At the out- break of the Boer War, settled in Port Eliza- beth, where he started business in silks and oriental ware, develop- ing it into the largest Inclian concern in this class of business in South Africa, with branches in Cape Town and Johannesburg, and a buying house in Kobe. A progressive business man with undoubted ability. He is the head of the firm of Teikamdas Bros., which has a large numher of employees, including 54 Europeans. Public work : Has associated himself prominently with all matters affecting the Indian community, has entertained distinguished oversea Indian visitors, and has done acts of public service that have won for him the respect of all sections of the community. His support of charitable objects has been extended cqually to both Indian and European. His assistance towards Indian welfare work in all parts of the country is well known Address; (Res.) 37, Chapel St., (Bus.) Strand St., Phones 2441-3791, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. Tooranti ; burg, Aug. 21, y. s. of S. Tooranti educ. St. Anthony's and Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, P.M.Burg. Since leav- ing school has been in private employment. Public actruities : Member of the N.IC. Executive (P.M.B. Branch) ; secty. of the Arya Samaj, PMB; was presdt., Maritz- burg Young Men’s Club; holds official and membership posi- tion of various social and religious bodies. Has recently retired as an active soccer player due to an accident to his ankle; v.-capi. of Natal team which won the S.A. Indian football tournament in 1932; repstd. Maritzburg in intertown football) on 23 occasions, being captain several times. During his captaincy, Maritzburg won the intertown trophy after many years. Was playing member of the Royals F.C, for 17 years, being its captain for many years ; Councillor of the M.D.LILA. cIddresy - P.O. Box 290. Maritzburg. RAMPORTAL, Sum- bhul, merchant and farmer; 6. Blackburn (near Verulam), L884. When a boy joined father’s business at Umhlali; later opened own store at Nonoti. After father’s death took over the manage- ment of the general dealer’s business. — Is also engaged as a cane farmer on an @s i scale. Public ache Patron, Stanger Indian Football Assocn,. ; trustee, Stanger Hindu Veda Dhrama Sabha ; holds a nunber of other official posts. School Manager of the Nonoti Government Aided Indian School. A liberal donor to all efforts directed towards the tm- provement of the (dian community, social, sport, religious, political, etc. Address; P.O. Box 13, Phone 603, Darnall, Natal. RANDERIA, Shap- urji Jivanji; 6. Rander; dist. Surat, Bombay, 1880; cd@ue., Account- ancy Institution, pass- ing Senior Bookkeeping Examination of the London Chamber of Commerce, at Bombay, qualified as an account- ant. Arrived in this country, 1900, stayed in Durban, started bus- iness as a bookkecper and then opened general dealer's store. Now engaged in busi- ness as shipping and forwarding agent, with his brother, Nasarvanji Jivanjee Randeria, in the firm name of the United Shipping Co. (Pty.}, Ltd. Pubhe activities : “look an active part in the Passive Resist- ance movement under Mr. Gandhi, in the Transvaal, 1908, being a member of the first Natal batch of 30, with Jate Dawood Mahomed, late Parsee Rustomjec and Jate M. C. Anglia, to court arrest in Transvaal, being sentenced to jmprisonment for 3 months as one of the leaders, subsequently suffering two further terms of imprisonment, 8 months and the maximum penalty of 6 months with late Parsee Rustomjee. Auditor of the Natal Indian Congress, the S.A.LC., Umgeni Road Hindu Temple and other public bodies. KXeenly interested in vernacular education, chairman of the Gujarati Literary Socicty. Sworn translator in the Gujarati language of the Supreme Court of South Africa (Natal Provincial Division), Member of the M, IX. Gandhi [sbrary and Parsee Rustomjee Hall Committee, since its inception. V.-chair. Indian Hos pital Advisory Committec. [s popular with all sections of the communtty. -tddress: P.O. Box 846, 173, Grey St., Phone C. 1566, Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 133 RANA, Choonilai Naran, merchant; 0. Navasari, Bombay, 1890; ¢. s. of Hargovan Moolchand ; edie. Navasari. On arrival from India visited Basutoland to investi- gale business — possi- bilities but eventually took up permanent residence tn) Durban, since 1905, Opened general dealer's busi- ness atl Mayville in 1914, clevcloping enter- prise in its present commodious quarters in 1918, which to-day is one of the leading shops in Mayville. Keenty mterested in the social anc political progress of the community; a member of the Surat Hindu Assocn Durban, and of the Natal Indian Congress. Address . P.O. Box 8, 1 & 3, Bellair Rd., Phone Overport 5085, Mayville, Durban, Natal, RANCHHOD, Bhaga, merchant; 0. India. Domictled in the Transvaal, where he is the proprictor of a general dealer's busi- ness. Public actiwifies : Is a keen public worker particularly interested in the social work of the — Prajapatis : a member of the Trans- vaal Prajapati Assocn, wliddress : P.O. Box 66, Morgenzon, Transvaal, RAWAT, Hajee Is- mail Ebrahim; 8. Nanavarachha, dzsé, Surat, 1877. Came to South Africa, follow- ing his father 10 years later. Joined his father’s business in Maritzburg, which is now being conducted by his sons. Made a pilgrimage ta Mecea in 1933. 1s highly es- teemed by all sections of the community. address + 69, Chureh St., Phone 2741, Mar- itzburg, Natal. RANTANJEE Parb- hoo; &. Vyara, Barcda State, 1892: edue Vyara. Came to South Africa 1908: settled in Jo- hannesburg, working as tailor, In 1911 opened business as merchant tailor, under firm name of Anglo-American Tailors. Changed name to Bombay Tailors, 1923, under which he rs still trading. Public achiviltes : Presdt., Witwatersrand = {nelian Bespoke Tailoring Em- ploy Assoen. } past- presdt., Transvaal Dargi Mundal; past treas., of this Agsocn., past presdt., Inchan Section Industrial Council for Bespoke Tailoring Industry for the Witwatersrand ; past executive member Vransvaal British Indian Assocn. and Transvaal Indian Congress. Attended several sessions of S.A.L.C, Conferences. A generous donor to all deserving funds. Has travelled extensively tn India. In India js a Itfe member of the Vyara Public Library, and of the Women's University. Poona, wlddresy + A8b, Market St., Phone 33-4360, Johannesburg, ‘lransvaal. REHMAN, Altaf ; &. Ellore, West Godvari district. 1893; 2rd s. of Abdul Rehman; educ. C.M.S. High School, Ellore. Came to South Africa in 1908, joined his uncle's firm of Cassim Moosa, Zeerust ; started own business in Zeerust in I917, subsequently be- came partner of the Gopane Stores in the Native Reserve; in 1931 acquired sole ownership. Furblic ac- hues ; Former secty., Zeernst Indian Com- munity ; repsd. Zeerust at the S.A.1C. Conference, Johannesburg, 1925; organised pro-Indian opinion among Europeans who gave evidence before the Lange Commission, and appeared before it himself; was responsible for the local arrangements connected with the visit of JXwaja Kamul-u-din and Lord Headley: repsd. Indian community at various public gatherings. Was presented to the HERI. the Prince of Wales when he visited Gaberones, B.P., who spoke to him in Hindustani, A keen sportsman in his younger days, winning in 1906, the Northern Sircar Cup open to college athletes. In Zeerust once did much to organise sport among local Indians and played himself, was captain of various sports clubs. Recreation : Reading—being a member of the 4eerust Public Library. Address ¢ P.O. Gopane, via Zeerust, Trans- vaal.

---

## Page 11

134 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO REDDY, Govindaswami Narainswami ; bh, Umainto, Jan. 3, 1893; 3rd s. of Narainswami Reddy, store-keeper ; educ. Indian High School, Maritzburg. Connected with legal office as clerk, also acting inter- preter, Umzinto Court. Played football for Maritzburg Higher Grade Indian School V.C.; was captain of the Umzinto Football Club for some time; captain of the Umgeni Lawn Yennis Club; a committee member of the Kanjit Sports Assocn.; trustee, Hindu Burial Board ; hon. auditor, Vishnu Temple. Address : P.O. Box 7, Umzinto. ROOKNOODEEN ; é. s. of late Khan Sahib Goolam Hoosen Desai, of Chiplun, Bombay Presidency., where he was presdt. of the municipality for many years and was a Icading merchant ; &, Chiplun, 1876; educ. Elphin- stone High School and College, Bombay, mat- riculated 1897. Arrived in South Africa in Dec., 1962, settled in Dur- ban. Was first in em- ployment as a_ book~- keeper and in 1908 started own business as general agent, since 1915 trades in timber and building material. Fublic activities Ever since arrival has been engaged in public activitics and was a co-worker with Mr. Gandhi for several years and an original member of the Natal Indian Congress. Member of the deputation which interviewed the Cabinet in 1924 in connection with the Boroughs Ordinance. A member of the South African deputation to India in connection with the agitation against the Class Areas’ Bill, 1925. A keen and intelligent public worker and an enthusiast in bringing together the various races for the purpose of securmg mutual understanding and goodwill, Club ; Orient (a member since its foundation.) Address » (Kes.) Kooknoodecn's Bldg., Prince Edward St. (Bus.) 135, Grey St., Phone 3507, ‘Tel. address: ‘Rook,’ Durban, Natal. ROOP, Naran, merchant; Is a part- ner in the firm of Roop & Makan, general dealers of Bethal; 6. India. An ardent worker for the im- provement of the Pra- japati community of the ‘Transvaal. Ad- dvess ¢ P.O. Box 127, Bethal, Transvaal. REDDY, Muduray Kaddurvaloo ; &. Jo- hannesburg, July 19, 1895 ; educ. Higher Grade Government Indian School and In- dian High School, Mar- itzburg. Started teach- ing career on the staff of St. Paul's Indian School: later head- master Greytown In- dian School, Restgned to take up appointment in Government Service, accepting post at Lady- smith. After 12 years’ service transferred on promotion to Port Shepstone. Public activitics Interested himself in the administrative side of sport, occupying position of presdt. of the Northern District Cricket Union (for three years in succession). Presdt., Natal Cricket Union ; life v.-presdt., N.D.1.C.U.; member, N.1L.F.A. executive; v.-presdt., Ladysmith District Sports’ Assocn. address : Government Indian School, Port Shepstone, Natal. RUSTOMJEE, Sor- abjee, Commissioner for Oaths; & 110, Field Street, Durban, Dec. 23, 1895 2rd s. of Parsee Rustomjee ; educ. Durban, and New High School, Bombay, and Panch- gani,nr. Mahableshwar. Outstanding public worker, connected with Mahatma Gandhi since a youth; imprisoned time of Passive Resist- ance, 1913, went on hunger strike in gaol. Has taken part in practically every public movement and consulted on Indian question by eminent leaders in India. Member of South African Indian deputation to India to agitate against Class Areas Bill and met then Viceroy, Lord Reading. President of S.A.1.C. at visit of Fazt-i Hussain delega- tion at Capeto in 1931-1932 ; occupied resiclence of Lord de Villiers at Wynberg, to entertain, on behalf of community, members of both Indian and Union delegations, Was first South African Indian, or, in fact, first non-European, to be present at a State Lanquet. Was president, Natal Indian Congress. His generosity knows no bounds of caste, colour or creed, and a characteristic of his life has been his devotion to the welfare of his compatriots. He is the principal representative of The New India Assurance Company in South Africa. Address : (Res.) The Castle, Mayville, Phone Overport 5121; (Bus.) New India Buildings, 17, First Avenue, Phone 4800, Tel. add. ‘““Rustomjec,” Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 135 ye. 5. of Sacoor Noor Mahomed; 6. Bhanvad, Wathiwar, Dec., 1895; edu. Bhanavad and Durban. Came to Natal in 1907. On jteaving school joined father’s firm of Sacoor Noor Mahomed, generat dealers, Durban, till 1927. In 1928 started own business in the firm name of A. 4. Tayob &Co., as general agent and broker, of which he isthe sole pro- prietor, Acted as ex- ; ecutor of the large estate of Moosa Hajee Cassim, 1921-31, and also estate of late Abdoola Amod, of Amsterdam, ‘lransvaal, from 1922 to date. Publre activities ; chairman, Young Meman’s Society, 1920-5 ; trustee of the Juma Masjid Trust ; v.-chairman, Young Muslim Youth League, Durban. Address - 28, Madressa Arcade, Phone 2079, tel. address, “Bhanvadwala,"’ Durban, Natal. Naar Tayob; SAIBE, Mahomed ; b, Tongaat, 1879 ; edue. Tongaat. On leaving school went to Jo- hannesburg, taking part im the gold rush, returned to Ne Visited Orange Free State, Basutoland and Rhodesia, seeking busi- ness possibilities. Eventually settled in Tongaat, now engaged farming and commerce. Public activitres : Member of the Indian Health Board Advisory Committee ; member of anti-Malaria Committee; member of the anti-Influenza Comimittee, 1918; former secty., Tongaat Jamat and the Red Crescent Society. Prominently «ssocrated with all progressive movements for the welfare of the community, in- cluding sport, being v.-presdt. of the Tongaat Estates Plane st, Tongaat, Natal. LC, Address : ur other names, see Unela at the end of this SAITH, Ismail Essop; 6, Kholvad; educ, Kholvad and Dabhel. Came to South Africa in 1914, took up residence at Zeerust, where he joined the firm of E. M. Saith, In 1920 returned to India; coming back in 1922, became manager of E. M. Bhayat & Co., later was connected with S. Hadjie & Co., Lichtenburg, Now trades in own name, Public actrortics : Was secty. T.BULA. (Zeerust Branch) and Zeerust Muslim Community ; was member of the Anjuman Islam of Bombay, when in 1920 in India joined Mahatma Gandhi's movement, was a delegate to the All-India National Congress at Ahmedabad ; delegate to the S.A.I.C. Conference at Cape Town in 1931. Always takes an active part in the public work of the Indian community of Zeerust. Was joint secty. and capt. of the Zeerust C.C. Address < Zeerust, Transvaal. SAMMY, T. V. (See under Padayachy, T. N.) SAM, Anthony Emmanuel ; 6. Ixim- berley, June 11, 1887; m, Anthonimal Harriet, 2nd d. of Sate A. Lazarus, formerly of Johannesburg. In pri- vate employment for many years, now in business. A very keen sportsman, started soccer career in 1902, retiring 1913; cap- tained G.W.LE.A, team at the South African tournament at Durban, 1913; manager, G.W.LE.A. team of 1920; champion track cyclist at WNimberley, 1910-13; repstd. Diamond Fields at the Cape Cycle competition at Paarl, 1911; winner billiards championship, Kimberley, 1910. Held various official posts; auditor, S.A.I.F. Board, 1904; secty., G.W-.I.F.A., 1907-13; secty., Coloured Cricket Board, Kimberley, 1913; presdt., Colonial- Born Assocn., Cape Town, 1925; presdt., Eastern Province Indian Football Assocn., 1926; now life v.-presdt, Address : (Res.) 8, Shell St., Port Elizabeth, Cape Province.

---

## Page 12

136 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO SANNYASI, Bha- wani Dayal; Com- missioner for Oaths ; b. Johannesburg, Sept. 10, 1892; s, of late Jairam Singh, ex- presdt, Transvaal In- dian Assocn. ; ede. at Bihar. Leaving South Africa 1904, returned 1912, On return elected presdt. Young Men's Indian Assocn., Ger- miston, 1913; one of the organisers of the Indian Strike at New- castle in 1913 and was sentenced to term of three months’ im- prisonment with hard labour, with his wife Jag-rani Devi and child Ramdutt. Edited Hindi section of The Indian Opinion in 1914, Dharma Vir 1917-18, clryavarta 1931-32. Organised the first and second South African Hindi Literary Conferences in Lady- smith and Pietermaritzburg in 1916 and 1917 respec- tively. Elected a member of Bijolia-Mewar (Rajputana) Commission to investigate grievances of the passive resisters in 1920, Attended ancl participated m many other political, social, literary and religious conferences during his short stay in India. Founded Jag-rani Press at Jacobs in 1922. Edited, printed and published the weekly Hindi in Hindi and English from 1922 to 1925. Repstd. South African Indians at Indian National Congress, Amritsar 1919, and Gaya 1922 and was instrumental in getting The S.A.LC. affili- ated to he Indian National Congress. Elected a member of the South African Indian Deputation to India in 1925. Established the Pravasi-Bhawan consisting of a fine library and free school at Bahuara, WKhargarh near Sasaram (Bihar) in 1926. Admitted into the Order of Sannyasis in 1927. Acted as a Tepresentative of the S.A. Indian Congress to study the working of the New Immigration Act in the districts of Utrecht and Vryheid rendering valuable assistance. Elected presdt. of the First Indian Overseas Conference held at Brindaban (Muttra) in 1930. Elected presdt. of Shahabad District Congress Committee and was sentenced to simple imprisonment for two and half years under scction 124 (a) of Indian Penal Cade for delivering seditious speeches. Placed in Class A and served his term in Hazaribagh Gaol. Released in 193L unconditionally by amnesty after serving one year. During the period edited a hand-written monthly magazine Karagar in the Gaol, Published ‘a ve port on the emigvants repatriated to India under the assisted emigration scheme from South Africa and on the problem of returned emigrants from all colontes’’ jointly with Pandit Benarsidas Chaturvedi in 1931 and subsequently published the “public opinion on the assisted emigration scheme under Ilndo-South “Ufrican -lgreement.”’ Presided at the All-India Flindt Journalists’ Conference at the Senate Hall, Calcutta University in 1931. Presided at tenth Bihar Provincial Hindi Literary Conference at Baidyanathdham (Deoghar) in 1931. Author of many Hindi books. namely History of Passive Resistance in South Africa, My Experiences of South Africa, Story of My Prison-life, Bioxgy Indians in Transvaal, and Aryan Culture, aphy of Mahatma Gandhi, Natalian Hindu, Vedic Religion Educator and Cultivator, The Vedic Praver, etc. Elected Honorary Indian Probation Oflicer ; v.-presdt., N many political, social, both in South Africa Jacobs. Tel. add. . "S Africa, SAMMY, Rama Krishnasamy ; @. s. of late M. Sammy; A, Kimberley, 1896 : edute. Pescod School, WKim- berley. Joined father’s business of general mer- chant, after school. Ts in charge of the busi- ness, since 1924, after his father’s retirement. Puble work -presdt., Indian Political Assecn. (affliated with the CLC.) 5 v.-presdt., Hindu Vedic Society ; v.-presdt., G.WLTLA.: active participant in and supporter of all Kimberley, Cape Prov SAMUEL, James; s. of late M. Samuel, of Durban; mam, Mary Agnes, d. of late A. B. Paul, 5 children ; edue. St. Aidan's College, Sydenham, Durban. Qualified for the teach- ing profession and has several teaching cer- tificates, including the Natal T.4 Certificate. First employed as assistant teacher at St. Aidan’s College, Sydenham, and in Sept., 1919 succeeded the late Mr. A. B. Paul as Headmaster of St. Patrick's Government ndian public matters. LC. since 1921. religious and literary societies and India. address PO. annvasi,’’ Jacobs, Natal, South Address : ince. 60, Jones St., Aided [Indian School, Umainto, which post he still hokis. Has been a keen football, cricket and tennis player of St. Aidan’s College VLC. ; Umainto Indian F.C., } became presdt. of the Un position for a number for Sydenham C.C, ; was the first hon. secty. later was captain of playing goalkeeper. On retiring “mzinto TC, and held this First played cricket ates C.C., of years. later played for F a useful bowler and bat ; selected to represent teachers in many important m College Tennis Club. communal werk. n Colonial-Born Indian founded the Umainto first hon, secty. ; reading and music, Address : atches, Played tennis for the Has always interested himself in 1925 was a v.-presdt. of the Assocn. of Umzinto; in 1927 Indian Society and was its ater became v.-presdt. Hobbies : St. Patrick’s Govern- ment .\ided Indian School, Umazinto, Natal, Founder of THE SOUTH APRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO (37 MOOSA, Hajee Cassim ; b. Porbandar, 1843; diced at Durban, May 16. 1921; 2nd s. of Hajee to South Africa in 1880, landed at Durban, being one of the first Indian mer- chants to start big business in Natal, traded in the firm name of Moosa Hajee Cassim. Was an enterprising business - man, with branches in Natal, O.F.S., Transvaal, Cape and Portuguese East Africa, He visited England twice to do his own buying. On the first occaston his purchase was so huge that he could not get the regular line of steamers to bring out his goods: he decided to buy his own boat, the s.s. Crescent, for transport in 1895, Ife then started a regular passenger boat service, known as the Moosa Line, between Durban and Bombay Public activities : He gave, with two others, the property known as the Porbandar Madressa ‘Trust and Juma Masgid Trust. Donated large sums of money for public needs of the Meman community. One of the original members of the Natal Indian Congress and took a large part in the affairs of the community. Is survived by three sons and one daughter. q ABOOBAKER Moosa, known as A. B. Movosa; ¢. s, of late Moosa Hajee Cassim; 6. Porbandar, Feb. 2. 1903; educ. Indian Higher Grace School, Durban; m. @ of O. H. A. Jhaveri, ex-presdt.. S.A.L.C, Came to South Africa with parents in 1909. On leaving school, connected with the management of his father’s estate, Proprietor of the firm of M. H. Cassim & Son, direct importers. Pubhe activities : Trustec of the Juma Masgid ‘rust for a few years; secty.. Orient Club, 1931; repstd. Natal at SAIC. Conference at Johannesburg, 1932; repstd. Natal at the Meman Con- ference in Jamnagar, 1933. Clubs © Orient, Durban. (In India) Porbandar State Club. Visited India, 1924, 1927 and 1932. 4dddress ; 138, Com- mercial Rd., Durban, Natal. THE SAYAN Cassim Tar Mahomed. Came FAMILY ABDULLA Moosa ; 2d s. of late Mooga Hajce Cassim ; 6. Porbandar, Jan. 15, 1906 ; cduc. Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School, Durban; am. onty d. of Amod H. 7 Poonjani, merchant, of Pre- toria. Came with parents to this country when a lad of 3. On leaving school connected with the manage- ment of his father’s estate ; trading in own right, pro- prictor “‘Muza’s’’ Boot and Shoe Store, also wholesale and direct importer. Public activities . Exec. mb, N.LC., 1924-7, 1934-35 ; mb. deput. first Nat- ional Cabinet on Boroughs Ordinance, 1924, member several other deputations; trustee, Juma Mosque ‘Trust; accompd. IXunwar Sir Maharaj Singh and family on their Rhodesian tour, 1934; Provin- cial Chairman, All-India Meman Ad- vancement Conference. In India served as an officer in the Bombay City Vol- unteer Corps, during Muslim - Hindu riots, 1929. Recreation - Swimming, member of the Indian Surf Life Saving Club. Clebs : Orient (now resigned) and Porbandar State Club (in India). Address : 136, Commercial Rd., Phone C 3857, Durban, Natal. HAJEE Cassim Tar Mahomed Sayani, also known as Cassim: Tar , b. Porbandar, about 1800, died in 1895. Was for some time Prime Minister (Dewan) of the State of Porbandar and also acted as Regent in the absence of the Rana Sahib, 1872. ‘ both Indian and British. He was thanked by the British Government for his services and hospitality to its officials. For his services to the State, his Highly respected in the State by the authorities, descendants enjoy special privileges on State occasions. ISMAIL Moosa;_ ¥. s. of late Moosa Hajce Cassim ; &. Durban, May 7, 1910; educ. Carlisle Street Govern- ment Indian School and Marine College; our. Aysa, o. d, of Hajee Ismail Aboo- baker Jhaveri, of Durban. A keen sportsman, playing football, tennis and cricket. Member, Ozone Club, Durban North. Made several visits to India. dddress : 136, Commercial Rd., Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 13

138 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SATYAPAL, Fakir ; b&b. Durban, 1893; edie. Saint Aidan’s [Indian Mission School, Cato Manor and self study ; m, Sooryakally Devi; 25.,6d. Occupation : private employment. Public activities > Since 1913, first a member of the Arya Yuvuk Sabha and a foundation member of the Aryan Benevolent Home, Durban, till 1922; was instru- mental in starting a Hindi School, under the auspices of the Vidya) Pracharnee Sabha, Looikopjes. In 1923 removed to Maritzburg where started Vidya Pra- charnee Sabha, was presdt. and trustee ; secty., South African Rishi Dayanand Centenary Committee (P.M.B. Branch) ; m 1924 formed the Nagri Hithyashi Sabha at Plessislaer, name has since been changed to Arya Samaj ; v.-presdt., Aryan Benevolent Society, Maritz- burg; secty., Arya Prithinidi Sabha, — 1929-30; foundation member and trustee Arya Samaj, Maritz- burg ; vedic preacher, Maritzburg ; committee member, N.C. (P.M.B. Branch) ; prominent worker, Maritzburg Indian Unemployed Committee. A keen student of Hindi literature, is a playwright with local reputation and a composer of religious and national songs. An ardent follower of Mahatma Gandhi; during the fast of the national leader observed sympathetic partial fasts on three separate occasions. Address: 134, East St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SEEDAT, Hajee Mahomed Ebrahim; merchant ; b. Surat city, India, 1872. Came to South Africa in 1894, settled down in Ladysmith. In 1900 opened business in the firm name of Ismail Moosajee, Ladysmith. After 10 years’ activities, changed the firm name to Ismail Mahomed & Co., with brother lL. L. Seedat as partner. Has large landed property interests in this area, Public activitres : Once has occupicd a nuinber of important public positions, has now prac- tically retired from public work. A large dunor to the Sastri College Building Fund. Is one of the leading and highly esteemed residents of Ladysmith and district. Address : | Ismail Mahomed & Co., 290-294, Murchison St., P.O. Box 94, Phone 92, Ladysmith, Natal, SARDIWALLA, Abdulla Amod; 0. Ladysmith, 1906; educ. Ladysmith and private study. On leaving school joined father’s business at Waschbank, later entered his uncle’s firm at Ladysmith, of which he is the managing director. Public actiutties - N member of the Muslim Library ; an associate treas. of the Mosque and interested in all public matters of the community. \ keen sportsman; — presdt., Schools F.C. which through his interest and support gained premicr position during the 1983 soccer season , a foundation member of the Mercantile Tennis Ctub, Address - 20, Uling Rd., Phone 119, P.O. Box 62, Ladysmith. SEEDAT, Kassim Mohamed, M.R.C.S. (England), L.R.C.P. (Lond.); 6. Newcastle, Natal, 3897; educ, Newcastle Convent School, Bombay Uni- versity and London ; married d. of Mahomed Ebrahim. Started practice in Durban in 1930, Public activities: While interested in all matters affecting the Indian community is unable, owing to the nature of his work, to take any prominent part, Was v.-presdt. and then chairman of the Ozone Club, Durban North ; Divisional Surgeoa St. John Ambulance Assoca, (Indian Brigade). [Xcen on all sports, being an official of many clubs, Clubs . Orient and Ozone. Address ¢ 173, Grey St., Phone C. 4886. (Res.) 73, North St., Phone C. 2838, Durban, Natal. SEEDAT, Mahomed Ismail; a son of Ismail Ibrahim Seedat; 6. Ladysmith, Dec., 1901; educ. Ladysmith and Toorawa School, Surat. On leaving school was in private employment. Now prominently connected with the firm of Ismail Mahomed & Co. Pubhe achiutties : Member, Muslim Library; ac- tively associated with sport, repstd, Natal in South African foot- ball tournament, 1926 ; repstd, Klip River in inter-town soccer and cricket; presdt., Ottoman F.C. and C.C, ancl its captain for many years ; founda- tion member and v.-captain, Mercantile Lennis Club. Address ¢ 304, Murchison St., Phone 92, Ladysmith, Natal, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 139 SEETHAL, Philip Michael; 6. Polela, Natal, Jan. 21, 1900; ed, Sutherlands and St. Nidan's Boys’ School, Sydenham and ‘Leachers’ Training Classes, Dur- ban. Passed Indian ‘Yeachers’ Senior Cer- tificate Exam. and the Natal Education Dept. T.4; ov. only & of the late A. V. Peters, of Pictermaritzburg ; 1. 8s. Kirst appointed on the teaching staff of the Sydenham Boys’ School, 1915. Pro- moted head master Lidgetton Indian School, 1919. Vor many years headmaster of Sutherlands Indian School. ~ Trans- ferred in 1933 to St. Paul's Indian Schoot, Maritzburg, the fourth largest Government-Aided Indian School in Natal; his services have been highly praised by the Educational authorities. Public services + v.-chairman, Natal Indian ‘Teachers’ Society, Pietermaritzburg Branch. Takes a keen interest in the Indian public welfare of Sutherlands and district; is particularly interested tn the youth movement. One of the Maritzburg Jubilee committce and a member of the sub-committee organising the children's sports con- nected with the celebrations. Address - (Res.) P.O. Plessislaer. (Bus.) St. Paul’s Government-Aided School, 559, Longmarket St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal, SEWDUTH, Chatwan; 6, Durban, Oct. 31, 1897; edue. Durban. On leaving school en- gaged in private em- ployment. Started own business, opening first passenger bus service on the North Coast. Later started an up- to-date passenger trans- portation between Dur- ban and Maritzburg. Now proprictor of Motor Service Station, 32, Alice Street. Pudlic activites ; Treas. and a foundation member of the Avondale Hindu Benevolent Society ; patron, Durban Indtan Golf Club (donor of the Sewduth Golf Trophy) ; patron, Stamford Hill Educational and Social Society; an official of various other football and cricket clubs. Recyeation 2 golf. Address; (Res.) 97, Woodford Grove. (Bus.) 32, Alice St., Phone Central 2930, Durban, Natal. SHAIKH, Ahmed Ebrahim; &. Lady- smith, 1903; educ. Natal. Well known in South African Indian commercial circles. Ac- tively interested in public affairs, member of Natal Indian Con- gress, repsd. Province at various S.A.1.C. Con- ferences at Capc Town, Kimberley, Johannes- burg, etc. Committce member and one of the foundation members of the Muslim Club, Dur- ban. Also a member of the Orient Club, Isipin- go. Sport : Tennis. V-presdt. and captain of the Moon- lighters Tennis Club, one of the pioneer Indian Clubs. First Club to arrange a tour of the ‘Transvaal, 1935. Address : (Res.) 73, North St., Phone 2551. (Bus.) 60, Commercial Rd., Phone C. 1960, Durban, Natal. SHAIKH, Hajee Ismail Ahmed ; ¢. s. of late A. M. Shaikl; a pioneer Indian mer- chant; 6. JNathor, India, 1900; educ. Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School. On leaving school en- tered father’s business, becoming proprietor in 1920 of A. M. Shaikh, wholesale merchants, Durban, Publee aetivi- ties: Foundation mem- ber of the Muslim Club; treas. of various char- itable institutions ; member of the N.LC.; and is a generous donor to all public funds. Made pilgrimage to Mecca in 1932. .tddress - (Res.) Cr. Old Dutch Rd. and Lansdell Avenue, Phone Toll Gate 8549, (Bus.) 60 Commercial Rd., Box 831, Phone C. 1960. Tel. add.: “‘Amshaikh,’”’ Durban, Natal. SIGAMONEY, Bernard L. E.; minister of the Church of South Africa; &. Durban ; ede. Durban and England. lormer principal, St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, Sydenham, Durban; now school principal in Johannesburg. Held important official positions in public and sports activities. Addvess - 18, Mosley St., Doornfontein, Johannesburg, ‘Transvaal.

---

## Page 14

140 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SHEIK ABDOOL Hajee; 6. Verulam. Inanda District, 1876; educ. Verulam. On leaving school went to the Transvaal. On the outbreak of the ’ Boer War came back to Natal, eventually settling in Dannhauser r in 1902, where started own business as general dealer with which he is connected. Public activities » Always prominently associated with the public life of the district ; appeared for Dannhauser before the Educational Inquiry Committee, 1928, repstd. Natal at several sessions of the S.A.1.C. Conferences ; v.-presdt., N.I.C. (Dannhauser Branch) ; was largely instrumental in erecting the Dannhauser Indian School building. For the use of the Indian Community he provided at his own cost of £400, free water supply. It was opened on July 6, 1934. Made a pilgrimage to Mecca, 1935. Address: Box 4, Phone 14, Tel. add.: ‘“Abdwol,’’ Dannhauser, Natal. SHEIK AMEER, Hajee ; 6, Durban, 1878; educ. Durban. First started business at Dannhauser. At the outbreak of the Boer War went back to Durban. Returned after peace declaration, resuming business at Dannhauser. Once the business had been de- veloped to the largest in the northern dis- tricts. Later on re- stricted business ac- tivities, became con- nected with other interests and also acted as interpreter at Newcastle, Public activities : Always has taken a leading part in the public life of the northern districts of Natal, Member of the N.T.C, (Dannhauser Branch) ; v.-presdt., Dannhauser Indian School Management Board ; took part in the Passive Resistance movement, [913. Went on pilgrimage to Mecca, 1935. Address: P.O. Box 4, Phone 14, Dannhauser, Natal. Seatac SINGH, J. B. (See Jangbhadoor, Dookee.) SINGH, Babu Tala- want; 9 6. Fyzabad, India ; edie. Fyzabad ; s. of Surnam Singh. Arrived in Natal in 1877. After the com- pletion of the period of employment, started own business at Veru- lam in 1896. Was also a large cane farmer in the district. Public activities Chairman, trustee, has been a member of Shri Gopal- lal Temple at Verulam ever since its inception; member of Natal In- dian Congress ; served as an official representing Verulam on various public occasions ; delegate to S.A.[C. at Cape Town Con- ference; served in the Boer War with Indian Am- bulance Corps, organised by Mr. M. K. Gandhi; retired from active business, December, 1931; law abiding and philanthropic, and is popular among all sections of the community. dddress ; P.O. Box 3, Verulam, Natal. SINGH, Bareyam; 6. Dhada, Punjab, Oct. 15, 1878. Joined Army, 22nd PI. at Punjab, 1894. Saw active service on the Frontier, Kerra and Makla- kund; decorated for services 1897-98. Engaged in Frontier warfare, returned home and sailed for South Africa in 1901. Married Catherine, ¢. of Adam Stein, Swellendam (2 d. and 1 s.). Settled in Cape Town. In 1904 founded grain and produce business in which he is engaged. Land and estate owner. Publre work: Chairman, Recption Committee of the first session S.A.LC,, 1919; v.-chairman, Cape British Indian Council, 1917—chairman, 1918; chairman, 1927-28 during the condonation agitation, of the Indian National Assecn. of Cape Province ; v.-presdt.,S A.L.C. Interested in all public efforts directed for the improve- ment of the community. Recreation : Billiards, chess and gardening. Address; (Res.) ‘'Vryheid,” Princess St., Phone 5-2115. (Bus.) 104, Reform St., Phone 2-0938, Cape Town. SINGH, Madhoo ; b. India, 1868; s. of late Rajpal Singh. After completing his term of employment, started cane farming, being one of the pioneer Indian farmers of Verulam. Is one of the leading farmers in this district. Public activities : Look part in the Indian Strike of 1913, under Mr. Gandhi. An advocate of religious and social advancement, being a trustee of the Shree Gopallal Hindu Temple. A liberal sub- scriber to any public movement directed towards the welfare of the community. Visited India in 1907 and 1923. Address. P.O. Vertlam, Natal. i] THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 141 BABU HAZURA SINGH School, matriculating from Punjab University, 1897, started study of medicine at the Medical College at Agra, but owing to ill health left college. Came out to East Africa in 1898 and entered railway service. In 1900 arrived in Durban. After two years’ stay returned to India. Came back to Durban 1904, then proceeded to the Transvaal, where he took up permanent residence. Was for a period a sub-railway contractor, later opened general dealer’s business. Irom 1919 to 1925 conducted wholesale business in Johannesburg. Public actitttes Has always taken an active part in Indian public affairs , identified himself with the passive resistance movement under Mr. Gandhi, suffered several terms of imprisonment, and continued to take a share right to the end, concluding with the 1914 settlement. In 1914 went back to the Punjab, here rendered war service by recruiting soldiers for France and Mesopotamia. Started primary school in Germiston which has since received Government recognition. A liberal patron to all public efforts for community welfare. Address : P.O. Box 292, Stand 872, Asiatic Bazaar, Phone 51-2251, Germiston, Transvaal. OS Babu Hazura ; 6. Rannia, dist. Ludhiana, Punjab, 1878, ede. Ludhiana Mission High

---

## Page 15

142 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN \WHO'’S WHO SINGH, Buldav Mahadev ; ¢. s. of late Buldav Singh; b, Durban, Aug. 13, 1885; educ. Victoria Street Government Indian School, Boys’ Model School, Smith Street, and Higher Grace Gov- ernment Indian School, Alice Street, Durban ; m, daughter of late Dulsingar Singh of Kearsney. Hirst in private employment, opened his first busi- ness in partnership with his father at Cato Manor. Has since been engaged in various trades—-wood and coal merchant, property, butchery, quarry, ete—being among the few colonial-born Indians to show outstanding qualities of business enterprise. Public activities : V.-presdt. N.LC.; trustee, Durban Hindu Temple; was one of those responsible for the building of the Aryan Benevolent Home and School at Cato Manor; presdt., Cato Manor Cemetery ; trustee, Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn. and official of numerous other bodies. Formerly a leading racchorse owner, Address: (Res.) “Lion’s Den,” Bellair Rd... Mayville, Phone Overport 5063, (Bus.) 133, Warwick Avenue, Phone Central 3289, Durban, Natal. SINGH, Chuni Har- dew ; 0. Padu, Hatras, United Province, April 21, 1875; educ. Private study. Came to South Africa in 1881, first in private employment in the Richmond district. Since 1887 has been permanently — residing in Sutherlands. One time was a member, with the rank of Police: sergeant, in the Natal Police, resigned to start general dealers’ busi- ness at Sutherlands. Traded till 1926, since retired. Also a large property owner, Public activities Patron of the M.D.L.F.A. for many years, also donor of the Hardew Singh's Floating Trophy ; was patron of the D.D.1.V.A; former chairman of the Sutherlands Veda Dharma Sabha ; former official of the Veda Dharma Sabha of Maritzburg, during the time of Swami Shankeranand ; patron of the Pentrich Parcharant Sabha; patron of the Plessislaer Arya Samaj, patron of the Plessislaer Indian Tennis Club; was presdt. of the S.A. Hindi Literary Conference at Pietermaritzburg in 1917; repstd. Indian community on the Edendale Settlement Advisory Board appointed by the trustees; official of several other societies. -lddress : P.O. Plessislaer, Maritzburg, Natal. SINGH, Brijlall; s. of Bhoola Singh; &. Richmond, !880; edie. private study. On leaving school was in private employment. In 19]4 started own business of Commercial Cartage Co.: in 1930 commenced business of general dealers; still connected with both the businesses. Prdblic ackivihies Member of the Natal Indian Con- gress; member of the Cato Manor School. Interested in all public work affecting the South African Indians. Address : Road. (Bus.) 158, Victoria St., Durban, Natal. (Res.} 347, Bellair Phone C. 1949, SINGH, Chundoo; s. of Bhagthou Singh: b Jaipur, 1851. Came to Natalin 1883. After serving the period of his contract, started farming, later opened general dealer's store. Is a large property owner. Public activities : Took prominent part in the Indian strike of 1913 A founder of the Gopallal Hindu Temple, Verulam ; founder and _ president ot the Shree Ramayan Sabha, Oakford. One of the leading Hindus of the district of Verulam, Visited! India, 1914. dddve.s: Oaktord, Verulam. SINGH, Oudaraj Raghoonath ; 0. s. of Raghoonath Singh; 6. Ladysmith, Sept. 10, 1910; om. Dhanwanti, 5th d. of A. Majles Sing, Richmond, ede, Lady- smith. On leaving school joined father’s business, with which he is now connected. Public work: v.-presdt. anc former secly., Arya Samaj, Jadysmith ; v.-presdt., Schools V.C.; one of the founders of the S.AR.C.C.; a member of the N.C. Keenly interested in all move- ments concerning the community. and sport. lddress : 31, Jadysmith, Natal. Hobby : Itling Red., Motoring Phone 109, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 143 SING, Harbajan Majles; é. Richmond. — Virst engaged in father’s business ; now timber and wattle contractor. Shares in active interest) in community work, fs a keen sportsman. Address; Box 43, Richmond, Natal. g SING,> Li Beharie — Majles; 0b. Richmond, I884; 0 educ. Maritz- burg. In 1902 joined father's bustness; now in charge of his own concern, One of the leading Indian merchants of Richmond, and takes @ prominent part in all Indian public activities. Patron, RLFC. ete. Address : Box 45, Richmond, Natal. SING, Amichand Majles ; 4. Richmond, 1882; educ. Maritz- burg. On lIecaving schoo) joined father’s business ; now conducting own business with his son. From 1918 to 1921 was Indian and Zulu interpreter atthe Magistrate's Court, Richmond, Actively associated with all public move- ments of the district; presdt., R.LF.C.: chairman, R.I.Store- keepers’ Assocn. Family are donors to the Sastri College Building Fund. -}ddress: Box 45, Richmond, Natal. SING, Rugbeer Majles; «. s. of Amichand M. Sing; 4. Rich- mond, 1903: edue. York Road Government School, Maritzburg : m, 3rd a. of Ramdial Singh, of Johannesburg. Entered the family business on leaving school; now proprietor of R. A. Sing, general dealers, at Richmond, Hella Hella and Enkumane. Public activities : Closely identified with the public activittes ef the Indian community of Richmond ; repstd. Richmond at the Provincial Fd- ucation Enquiry Committee in 1928; repstd. Indian community on the Richmond General Jubilee Committee member of the Indian School Committec. lddress P.O Box 45, Phone 1, Richmond, Natal. THE iM AJLES | SING ‘FAMILY © SING, Balwanth Majles; .. of Reharic Majles Sing : é Richmond, November 23, [908 educ, York Road Government School, Maritzburg. Nuw engaged in busines: Secty., ROEDPLA. bddress : Box 435, Richmond, Natal. ~« SING, the late Majles ; 4. Kusack, Punjab. Came to Nata _in I880. In 1890 at Richmond started business, which later on was converted to Majles Sing & Sons. Took leading part in al Matters connected with Indian welfare; was chairman of the Hindu Society. Died lebruary 18,1921. Survived by foursons : Amichand, Beharic, Sunder anc Harbajan. SING, Sunder Majles ; 3rd 5. oflate Majles Sing ; 6. Richmond, March 20, 1888 , edie. Richmond and) Maritzburg. On Jeaving school entered ‘fatber's business. After father’s death took charge of the business, which is now being conducted by his son. Now retired. Takes a leading part in all Indian activities of Rich- mond. elddress : Box 45, Richmond, Natal. SING, Amar Sunder Majles ; e. s. of Sunder M. Sing; >, Richmond, Feb. 2, 1910: edite. York Road Government School. Maritzburg ; a. 2rd d. of Ramatal Singh, Johannesburg. Jingaged in business, proprietor of A. S. Majles Sing, genera! dealer, Rich- mond. Public activities: Secty., Richmond — Indian community, N.LC. branch. Was RLFON.. its seety. for 3 Selector and Council member, M.LC.FLA. > was chairman Rich- mond Indian Social Circle mem ber Indian School Committee , founded Richmond-Indaleni Bantu I. Assoen , 1930, of which he ww the patron. Address P.O. Box 45, Phone L, Richmond, Natal.

---

## Page 16

144 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SINGH, Raghoonath; 5b. Malama, Hilsa, Patna, 1872. In 1890 came to Natal, where he joined the Natal Government Railways, promoted chicf sirdar and was a railway con- ductor at Ladysmith. Visited India in 1910, and on return resigned from ratlway service and started own business as general clealer. Public work : This dates from 1910; during passive resistance movement, 1913, was at the head of the strikers in the Northern Districts: prominent member and official of the N.ILC. and repsd. Natal at S.A.[.C. Conferences held at various Union centres; repsd. South Africa at the All-India National Congress Session at Madras, 1927-28. A stalwart of Arya Samaj in the Union, founding the Ladysmith branch, 1916, being presdt. for 9 years: one of its trustees and treas. since formation. Organised first Hindu Literary Conference held at Ladysmith, 1916; repsd. South Africa at Aryan League Conference at Dethi, 1927; a preacher, trustee and v.-presdt., Arya Prithnidi Sabha ; chairman and founder of the governing board of the Putnispruit Government-Aided School; presided at the Vedic Conference and Swami Dayanand Centenary Celebra- tions at Durban; a founder of the N.R.D.LF.A. and an official of a number of sports clubs. A donor to the Sastri College Building Fund. A Commissioner for Oaths, 1935. Address: 31, Illing Rd., Phone 109, Ladysmith, Natal. SINGH, Ravikrishna b. Jan. 1, 1888. anly s. of Babu Talawant Singh, | educ. Higher Grade Indian Govern- ment School and St. Aidan's College, Syden- ham. On leaving school, joined Mahatma Gandhi in the passive resistance movement of 1913; served two terms ofimprisonment, namely, 6 weeks and 6 months. On the end of the struggle re- turned to Verulam, where he joined father’s business and is now engaged in cane-farming on an extensive scale. Auditor and committee member of the Shree Gopallal Temple; treas., Hindu Miatra Mundal; founder of the Verulam Hindu Dramatic Society ; a keen worker in alt matters concerning the welfare of Indians. Patron, N.C.D.LP.A.; v.-presdt., Verulam J.F.C. and Verulam I..C. Address ; P.O. Verutam, Natal. SINGH, S. L.; 6. Durban ; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban; ww. «. @ of late GD. Lalla. Public activities: Secty., South African Cotontal- Born and Settlers’ [n- dian Assocn.; secty., Sir Kurma Reddi Un- employment Kelief Committee; was presdt., Arya Prith- inidi Sabha (Aryan Representative As- sembly) ; was presdt., Aryan Benevolent Society, Durban; is connected with numer- ous other institutions. Held highest positions in administration of Indian sports; South African manager of the All-India Football tour, 1934; former presdt., N.LF. D.DA.F.A.; presdt., Natal and Durban Cricke nion ; presdt., Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn. : council member, S.A.IB.A.; manager and trainer, Natal Football NC; held many other official and responsible positions. Hobby - Press contributions on sports in The Natal Advertiser. address ; 80, First Avenue, Durban. > + -e SOMA, Vallabh; 6. Matavad, dist. Surat, 1900; educ. Matavad. Came to South Africa 1912, settled at Jo- hannesburg. First in employment; later started own business as merchant tailor, first in Johannesburg, now in Jeppe. Public ac- tivities : Treas., Kot Hitvardhak Mundal; secty., Transvaal In- dian Tailors’ Employers’ Assocn. In 1929 during the civil disobedience movement, led by Mr. Gandhi, acted as treas. of the fund to aid the movement in Jalalpur. Address : 307, Commissioner St., Jeppe, Phone 24-1844, Jvhannesburg, Transvaal, For other names, see Unclassified Dist 3 {10 at the end of thi ————— | | | THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO SOOMAR, Yousuf; b. Ranavav, 1892; 2.5. of Jate Issa Hajee Soomar, educ. Bombay; managed the firm’s Standerton business, 1912-14, Member. Is- lam Lodge, Bombay. Clubs: Orient, Isipingo, Durban and Islam, Bombay. Hobby: Read- ing. -lddress : (ndsa}, Cio Messrs. Phillips & Co., Chemists, Mayo Rd., Fort. Bombay ; (South Africa), 163, Commercial Rd, Dur- ban, SOOMAR, late Issa Hajee ; b, Ranavay, Porbandar State, 1863; dred Poona, 1926. Came out to Natal at the age of 13, soon after went to the Transvaal, starting business at Standerton, one of the pioneer Inchans to settle there. During the \nglo- Boer War he was the only Indian merchant who was allowed to carry on his business, being popular with both British and Dutch. In J914. while retaining his commercial interests in SOOMAR, Noor- mohamed: 6. Kana- vav, 1902: 3rd s. of Jate [ssa Hajee Soomar; educ. St. Navier High School. Hobby: Travel- ling. «lddvess : Messrs. Phillips & Co., Chemists, Mayo Rd., Fort, Bom- bay. THE SOOMA SOOMAR, 6. Durban, 1900; 2rd s, of late Issa Hajee Soomar ; educ. St, XNavier High Bombay, Sole propriec- tor of Messrs. & Co., Chemists. Mem- ber, [slam widdress ¢ 3ombay. SOOMAR, 1907; 4th s. Issa Hajce educ. St. Navier High School, Bombay. Toured Europe, 1930. Clo Messrs, Phillips & Co., Mayo Rd., Fort, Bombay. R FAMILY. Phillips & Co., Mayo Kd., Fort, “Address: N Dada; '" School, Phillips T.odge. S. Africa, he retired to India where he acquired a_ large business in Bombay. His estate consists of extensive immovable properties in India and in S_ Africa at Standerton and Durban. During the Great War, he made generous donations towards war funds and contributed towards numerous charitable objects. Died at Poona, Bombay. He is survived by a widow, 4 sons and 5 daughters. Abdool Carrim; 6 Ranavavy, of lave Soomar ;

---

## Page 17

146 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SONNE, Kalanjee Pursotham ; 6. Kure! Supa; dtst. Navasari, 1879. Came to South Africa in 1902, first stayed in Cape own. after two years’ resi- dence in Vryburg, where started general dealer's business, went to Grahamstown, in 1907, where opened business as general dealer; he is proprie- tor of the African Laundry. In India follows the occupation of a goldsmith and farmer. Public work - Was chairman of the British Indian Assocn., Grahams- town, and has been prominently connected, since the commencement of his stay, with the public work of the city. dddress : 2, Cobden St., Phone 367, Grahamstown, Cape Province. (In India) Kurei Supa, Post Munsad, via Navasari, Bombay, India. SOOBIAH, Joe; &. Hstcourt, Feb. 29, 1888; educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Maritz- burg; nz. Govindamah, d. of Sinnapa Pillay. On leaving school en- gaged in market busi- ness, which is a highly successful concern. Ls a large property owncr. Publre actrutties : lormer presdt., Maritz- burg Indian Voters’ Assocn., taking part in election of candi- dates; was presdt., Siva Soobramonier and Marrieaman ‘Temples ; presdt., Colonial-Born Indian Assocn.; was secty., NULC. {P.M.Burg. Branch); first secty., H.Y.M.A.; Natal delegate to the S.A LC Conference in Johannes- burg, 1925; prominent worker during the Indian strike of 1913, being chairman of the controlling committee; gave much useful information to the Paddison Deputation in Maritzburg, 1926, and was one of those responsible for its entertainment during its visit Weenly interested In higher education for Indians, he himself has four sons at Lovedale, which is the highest number coming from any one family. As youth was fond of sports, winning many trophies for long distance and track cycle racing ; played soccer aud cricket, keen on boxing. -lddvess - (Res.} 451, Pietermaritz St., Phone 3750. (Bus.) Municipal Market, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SOOKER, Pranjivan; 6, Navasari, 1900. Came to South Africa in 1914, joining his father’s firm of merchant tailors, Since 1917) has can- ducted his own estab- lishment. Public ac- figeties : Secty., Trans- vaal WKhatri Society ; has contributed to the pubhe work of his group. .lddress : 174 and 131, Market St., Johannesburg, Trans- vaal, SURTIE, Tayob Noormahomed, also well known as Tyob Surtie. merchant; 6. Sukpur, Jamnagar State, about 1881; educ. Ranavav, Came to South Africa tn 1896, landed at Dur- ban. After a short stay proceeded to Basutoland, where he was among the early Indians ; there he joined the firm of his brother, Ebrahim Noormahomed Surtie, general dealer. In 1909 started own business as general dealer, with which he is still connected. He has developed it into one of the largest Indian businesses in Basutoland, with a chain of branch stores. Public achvitics » Chairman of the Basutoland Indian community since 1914, a year later was res- ponsible for getting the deportation order against several Indians in Basutoland cancelled—petitioning, among others, the H.E. the Viceroy, the Secretary of State for the Colontes, the Resident Commissioner and others ; as chairman was responsible for drawing the attention of the Imperial Conferences of 1923 and 1926 to Indian grievances in Basutoland. On behalf of the Indian community, presented addresses to the various notabilities who visited Basutoland, including H.R.H. the Prince of Wales and H.R.H. the Duke of Kent (then Prince George), the various Governor Generals and Sir Herbert Stanley; has done a great deal to create a friendly under- standing between the officials and resident Indians. Is highly respected by Basuto chiefs and pcople of Basutoland. Address > P.O. Butha Buthe, tel. add. ‘‘Surtie,”” Basutoland. a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 147 SURATWALA, Ganda Ranchod: 8. Surat, 1900, educ. Surat. Came to South Africa when a boy. Joined firm of C. B. Gihwala, merchants and Importers, Cape Town. In 1933 opened own firm of G. R. Suratwala, general merchant and importer. Prblc work ; Member Cape United Hindu Assoen., which body is affiliated to the Cape Indian Congress. In- terested in all public affairs. -Iddress . 124, Hanover St.. Cape ‘Town, AR, Mahomed Ally; 0. Jodiya, 1890, ede. dodiya and private study. Came from India 1903: settled in Dundee, Natal. After study in Dundee, joined his father’s business in Dundee. In 1907 went to Transvaal, In 1909 returned to [ndia on short visit, coming back 1910. Stayed in Lydenburg, joining father’s business. In 1914 went to Carolina, where opened his own business as general dealer. Has also a branch store in Carolina. Has been an enter- prising business man. Pubire activities Secty. and treas.. Indian School Board, Carolina; is prominent member of Indian community, and has always been acuvely associated with all’ matters affecting the Indian community in his district. Is esteemed by all those with whom he comes in contact. ts keenly interested in religious affairs of Islam. .tddress Box 68, Phene 17, Carolina, Transvaal. TALWANTSINGH. § (Sce under “S"). TAYOB, Hajee Tar Mahomed; 6. Rana- vay, WKathiwar, 1866. Came to South Africa in 1892, tanded at Durban ; later pro- ceeded to Pretoria ; in 1892 settled at Preters- burg, where he was a pioneer Indian resident. In 1895 opened general dealer's business anc subsequently added wholesale department. Still takes an active interest in the firm of T. M, Tayob, of which he is the proprietor. Publee actwities : Vrustee. Pietersburg Mosque (since Tesigned to proceed to India). Offered to erect school for Indian children at his own expense in Pietersburg and has donated liberally to public funds. In tndia: Member, Victoria Islamic Madressa ; presdt., Ranavav Anjuman Islam ; trustee, Najee Masgid, Ranavav. Landed property owner in Bombay and Pietersburg, in the name of Tayob, Ltd. Address: P.Q, Box 66. Phone 77 Pietersburg, ‘Transvaal. ‘ THAKER, Harilal a Ambaram; «¢. s. of Pandit Ambaram Maharaj; 0. Latipur, Jamnagar State, 1895; educ. Shree Daxina Moort: Vidyarthi Bhu- van, Bhavnagar, Passed Matriculation of the Bombay Univer- sity, 1913. Came to South Africa in 1914, stayed in Durban, were entered com- mercial career. Started own business as general dealer and direct im- porter in 1923, which is still being conducted by him. Public achuities Joint treas. of the Natal Indian Congress, and also of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha; secty. of the Kathiwar Arya Mundal ; repstd, Natal at the S.A.LC Emergency Conference, jehannesburg, 1933, Address - 183, Grey St., Phone C, 1216; Tel. add. Thaker,” Durban, Natal. THAMBL, Vengatas; 2nd s. of late H. Krish- nasamy ; 6, Johannes- burg, April, 1907; eduec. Eurafrican Nor- mal College, Johannes- burg. Property owner and estate agent; director and secty. of Thambi Bros, (Pty.), Ltd. Puble achwities ; Has shared with his brother, K. Naran- samy, an active in- terest in the welfare and social work of the Tamil community and in sporting activities. Councillor, Melrose Siva Soobramanya Temple; councillor, Transvaal Indian Foothall Assocn. ; councillor, Johannesburg Indian Sports Assocn.; treas., Witwatersrand Indian Football Assocn.; treas., Rangers [Football Club : treas., Rangers Tennis Club; joint treas., Hindu Sabha School Committee; treas., Young Men’s Vedic Society (Vrecdedorp) ; hon. auditor, Transvaal Tamil Benefit Society ; ex-secty., Young Men’s Vedic Society (Vrededorp) ; ex-capt. of Goldfields Cricket Club™- capt., Rangers Tennis Club; manager, Witwatersrand Football team against All-India at Johannesburg, 1934. A keen tennis player, has won the Rangers club singles and doubles events. Is also a wholesale fancy goods merchant, trading as K. Thambi in Barkly Arcade, Address: (Res,) 443, Fifteenth St., Vrededorp, (Bus.) P.O. Box 7480, Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 18

148 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO THOMAS, Ephraim: 8. Maritzburg; 2nd s. of late Rev. J. ‘Thomas ; educ, Higher Grade Government School and Indian High School, P.M. Burg. m. Ellen, d. of A. H. Peters, cs., P.M.Burg. Started career as a teacher at the Wes- leyan Government- Aided School, P.M.Burg. Entered Government. ser- vice being appointed to teaching staff at the Depot Road Government School, Durban ; transferred on promotion as headmaster to the Ladysmith Government Indian School ; later promoted as principal to the Carlisle Street Government Indian School, Durban. Putlic activities : V.-presdt.. Natal Indian Teachers’ Society; member of the Indo-European Joint Council. Was a keen sportsman, occupied official position in the N.LF.A.: captd. Natal in S. African soccer, 1924. Visited India, 1935. Recreation : Tennis. Address » Carlisle St. Govern- ment Indian Schoct, Durban, Natal. THOMPSON, Moses David; 6. Durban, Jan 17, 1888 ; educ. Higher Grade Government Indian School, Durban, A break in his studies owing to malaria led him to take courses in physical culture. Secured Diploma of Inch Institute of Physical Directors, London Now practising as physical culturist in Cape- town, with large practice among all sections, in- cluding Europeans. Public work : Took part in ‘passive resistance movement in Transvaal under Mr. Gandhi, 1910. Served a term of imprisonment for three months’ with hard labour. Is a keen soccer enthu- siast. Played in junior inter-town soccer, representing Durban against Marttzburg, 1908. Played soccer in the Transvaal. Executive member, Cape Indian Congress. Chairman, Holy Trinity (R.C.) Church at Matroos- fontein, Cape Province. Address : St. Stephens St., Matroosfontein (via Elsies River) Cape. (Bus.) 2la, Hanover St., Capetown, TIKKLY, Suleman; 2nd 5. of late Hajee Ismail Tikkly ; #. Kholwad, 1895: educ. Kholvad. Came to South Africa, 1906, joined father’s business in Picters- burg. Later on was with brother. Transferred in- terests to Zeerust, 1915, joining Ismail Suleman & Co. In 1918 became a partner in the firm of S. E. Bhyat & Co. In 1931 became sole proprietor of S. E. Bhyat & Co., Zeerust. Publ actwities : ‘Treas. of the Zecrust Muslim and Indian community; one of the leading Indians of the district. Address : Box 77, Phone 17. Tel. address: “‘Bhyat,” Zeerust, Transvaal. TIKLY, Amod Ismail; merchant; 6. Isholvad, 1889; ¢. s. of late Hajee Ismail Tikly (see Who Was Who); cdue. Kholvad. Since 1907 has been in charge of the firm of ‘likly, Pietersburg, being proprietor after father’s death. He has been responsible for developing this business into one of the largest in Northern Transvaal, having a large European clientele. Employs European assistants. He is widely respected by all sections of the community. Publre actvitics : Interested in all affairs of the community, occupy ng several official positions. Address; P.O. Box 68, Phone 63, Market St. Tel. address: “Tikly,”” Pietersburg, Transvaal. MLEY, Prabhu- Upnai Bhagwanjee b, Umli, Navasart, Boroda State, [887; educ. Amli. Twice mar- ried: late Dahi, d. of Govind Mawjee, Sooraj é of Narsit Mikir; 6 daughters, I son. Came to South Africa in 1905, landed at Dur- ban. <A year after- wards came to Port Elizabeth, where started own business. In 1920 opened boot and shoe store, with which he is stifl connected. Public activities : Secty., Veda Dharma Sabha, 1912-15, its v.-chairman, 1915-16; 1920-26; chairman, Kshyatria Gujarati Mundal, 1920-26 its v.-chairman since 1928: com- mittee member, Cape British Indian Council (Port Elizabeth Branch). 4ddress : 125, Walmer Rd.. Phone 2996, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. educ. Cawnpore and Delhi. Took Arabic & Urdu and special religious studies. Came to South Africa with parents. First in private employment. Started business as general dealer in Dullstroom in 1916. Developed a successful business, having the support of large clientele of Europeans, by whom he ts highly respected. In India was secty. of the Anjuman Islam at Simlak. Takes a keen and intelligent interest in all public affairs, and is a person of progressive outlook. dddress : P.O, Box 6 Phone 6, Dullstroom, Transvaal. Vii Ebrahim Mahomed; /. Simlak, Surat, 1896; VALIALLAH, Ismail Mahomed ; b. Kathor Surat, 1899; s. of late Moulvi Mahomed Vali- allah, well known priest in South Africa ; educ. IKxathor and Mahome- dan Oriental College, Aligarh, now the Mus- lim University. Came to South Africa in 1919 as an educated entrant, settled in Johannes- burg, where followed for a time the pro- fession of teaching. Now engaged as a property owner and dealer. Pubheé activitues: Prominently connected with all public activities ; a founder and the chairman of the Orient Club, Johannesburg ; chairman of the New Clare Stand- owners’ .\ssocn.; secty, of the ‘Transvaal Muslim Assocn. and Surthee Madressa [slamia, New Clare. Publications: Tamaddune [slam (translation), Travels in Mauritius, Burma.and Many Parts of India; also a contributor to the vernacular press in South Africa. address : 30, Griffith Rd., New Clare, Box 3 Newville, Phone 3 Newlands, Johannesburg, Transvaal. a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 149 VALJEE, Hirjie ; 6. VYhoyana, dist. Kathi- war, 1863. Came to South Africa. 1894, stayed first in Durban. Soon after came to Ladysmith, opening business as a jeweller. In 1905 acquired Trans- vaal domicile. Paid a short visit to India in 1906. On return has made Ladysmith his permanent South Af- rican home. Public activittes: Founder and president, Sanathan Dhrama Sabha; has made a generous don- ation towards erection of the Shree Geernara Soni Gratec Heep Vardhak Mandal at Porbandar, of which he is one of the trustees. Address : 302, Murchison St., Ladysmith, Natal. + VALLABH, Motiram; es. of Vallabh Jaga; b. Navasari, 1900 ; educe. Navasari and Govt. Indian School, Jo- hannesburg. Came to South Africa in 1913. On teaving school joined father’s business of merchant — tailors, since 1923 has been in charge; was also pro- ptietor of Vereeniging Silk Bazaar which he closed down in 1929, Public work : Has been a keen worker in the organisation of the be- spoke tailoring industry, was secty. of the Bespoke Tailoring Assocn. (Section “C”’); member, Industrial Council’ for the Bespoke ‘Yailoring Industry ; joint secty., ‘lransvaal Indian Tailors Employers’ Assocn. Recreations ; ‘Tennis, one of the founders of the Sarcenet T.C. Address ¢ 78a, Harrison St., Phone 33-8422, Johannesburg, Transvaal, VALOD, Mahomed Ebrahim. Partner in the firm of Mahomed Ebrahim & Co., wholesale merchants, 29, Commissioner Street, Phone 33-6826; Box 1393. Tel. add.: ‘‘Gabaco,”” Johannesburg, Transvaal. VALLABHAI, Bha- gabhai, merchant; 6. Veraval, dist, Nava- sari, 1890 ; educ. Veraval. Came to South Africa in 1897, stayed in Durban for a short time before proceeding to Johannes- burg. Here started business as silk mer- chant; in 1918 joined the firm of the Japan Bazaar, of which he is still a partner. In India is a partner in the oil mills at Mia- guam, Baroda. Public activities ¢ Presdt., : Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj, for a while was its joint-treas. Interests himself in all public matters affecting the Indian community. A Commissioner for Oaths, 1935. Address: (In India) Veraval, Navasari- (In South Africa) The Japan Bazaar, 63, Eloff St., Johannesburg, Transvaal, VANDAYAR, Shum- mugam ; «¢. s, of late P. Vandayar, Port Elizabeth ; b, Port Elizabeth, May 8, 1908 ; educ. Dower School, Port Elizabeth; Now engaged in busi- ness as fruiterer and confectioner. Proprie- tor of the Imperial fruit and confectionery stores. Has shown keen business ability and has progressive trade ideas. Public activities ; Former committee member of the Siva Soobramon- ium Aliayam; v.-captain of the Shamrocks Football Club; also a founder and the first captain of the Orient Indian Cricket Club. An active cricketer and footballer. Address : 32, Walmer Rd., and 126a, Russell Rd., Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. VARACHIA, Ahmed Essop; 0. Khergam, disf. Surat, 1902; educ. Government Indian Schoo}, Johannesburg. Came to South Africa with parents in 1913, settled in Johannesburg. First worked at Potgietersrust and later at Nylstroom. After a short stay in India returned to South Africa, when started own business at Potgietersrust in 1927. Has shown considerable business acumen for in a short time has developed it into the leading Indian store in this area, Public activili He takes a large share in the control of the Madressa at Potgietersrust ; was treas. of the Potgietersrust Incan Cricket Club ; is interested in all welfare movements and has extended to them liberal financial support. While in this country he has not forgotten the claims of the Mosque anu Madressa of his native town, to which he has been a generous donor, Address : P.O. Box 20, Phone 88, Potgietersrust, Transvaal.

---

## Page 19

150 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO VATHER, Somchand Panachand ; 2. Jam- Nagar, Nathiwar, 1876; educ. Jamnagar; 2 5. —Damjee Somcehand Vather and = Navin- chandra Somchand Vather. Came to South Africa in 1897, settled first in Durban, In 1902 transferred interests to Maritzburg, and traded asa genera) dealer; in 1925 ad- mitted his sons into the business, which now trades in the firm name of S. P. Vather & Sons, Fubhe ac- Nvities Trustee of the Veda Dhrama Sabha, estab- lished by Swami Shankeranand + patron of the Vidya Parcharee Sabha; cornmuttee member of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha ; member of the N.I.C.: has been staunch worker in the field of social and religious advancemett; keen on the propagation of the vernacular language; a strong financial supporter of these causes. ddr (461, Church St., Phone $238, Pietermaritzburg, atal, VYAS, Jatashanker Pranshanker; 6. Raj- kot; dst. Kathiawar, 1878; educ. Rajkot Kathiawar High School. After leaving school went to Southern India, remaining there for 3 years, Returned to Rajkot and in 1896 on advice of Mahatma (then Mr.) Gandhi came to South Africa with his brothers. Was at the same school and a contemporary of the nationalist leader, Re- mained in South Africa until the Boer War, then went back to India. On outbreak of war was sent away to l.ourenco Marques. Entered Natal in 1901; a year later returned to Transvaal, settling in Pretoria, where opened general dealer’s business and a bookkeeping agency. Has been closely associated with Mr. Gandhi, who stayed with him in Pretoria, He was in charge of the Pretoria office of Mr. Gandhi. During the passive resistance movement, his house was the Pretoria headquarters of the Mahatma. After the struggle, Mr. C. F. Andrews, who had arrived in ADEE, Amod Ismail; 6. Transvaal, 1906; ed. Government Indian School, Johannesburg. After _. schooling, joined business of his uncle, L.A. Cajec, at Nrugersdorp, trading in firm name of The Bombay House. Is now in charge of the business, as well as that of Ismail & Co., Krugersdorp, and has branch at Vereeniging in name of Wadce & Co. He is enterprising in all public work and his South African outlook, in matters of public interest, is appreciated by all sections of the community. Is secty. of Krugersdorp Indian Assoen. and was one of those prominently associated in securing the sports ground for the Indian community, In all work affecting his community he has taken a leading part; keenly interested in sport, being secty. Keugersdorp [ndian Ottoman C.C Address » 38, Market St., Krugersdorp, Phone 201, Bos 84, Krugersdorp, ‘Transvaal. Interpreter- Clerk, Dept. of Justice, Union Public Servic b. Durban, 1880; suc- . ceeded his father, who had retired on pension, as Indian Interpreter at the Durban Prisons in 1900. Transferred in 1922 to Ladysmith as Justice Dept. Inter- preter on the Magis- trate’s staff. In 1933 transferred to Durhan Magistrate's Offtce as Indian Interpreter- Clerk to the Ist and 2nd Civil Courts. Has taken a prominent part in Muslim charitable organisa- tions and together with another, founded the Society Anjuman-Esha-a-tul Islam of which he is trustee and chairman of the council. Was elected trustee to represent Colonial-born Muslims on the Board of Trustees of the Jumma Masjid Trust, the largest in South Africa. Later resigned owing to transfer to eadysmith ; was a keen sportsman and has played cricket and football as carly as 1896. He is an cx- presdt. of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. and also of the Klip River District Indian Football Assocn. and is life v.-presdt, of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. He still takes an active part in sport and tolds Official, posts of other sporting organisations. Was chairman of the Reception Committec of the All-India Soccer team when it visited South Africa in 1934. Is marricd and has 8 children, including 5 sons who have distinguished themselves in various sports. Two of them have had inter-provincial ronours, one has gained his South African cap. Hobbies: shooting and fishing. Address : Law Courts, Durban, Y ine D. Fakir; a S oe) a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 151 BIOGRAPHIES — SE CTION TL. Owing to the delay in the forwarding of photographs, tt has been found im possible to classify the following AHMED, Moosa Ebrahim ; Commissioner for Oaths for the district of Pictermaritzburg, Natal, 1933. Fay further reference sce page 34. ALFRED, Ramsamy Ramudu; #. Black- burn Fstate, near Dur- ban, W905 educ Durban. On leaving schoal was connected with the N.G.R Catering Dept from 1901, Resigned in 1912, While in employ- ment, served Dr. Starr Jameson, Sir Matthew Nathan and other distinguished persons. Started own business, as caterer, was responsible for the calering arrangements of the functions given to the Hon. G. IX. Gokhale, when he visited Durban in 1912. Was in private employment from 1915-1932 and simultaneously carried on own business as general dealer. Now occupied entirely with his own business, Public actraities : Patron of the Vedic Senmarka Society Government-Aided School, Sea Cow Lake, which he was invited to open in 1930; committee member, Gandhi Aided School, Durban. Sentamil Government- Has presented a number of trophies to encourage sport, one to the Df. Hotel Employes’ Assocn., one to Sydenham and another to Maritzburg Grade Schools --presdt., - REL: ‘7 Was presdt., Stamford Hill b.C.: Sydenham F.C. and Higher trustee, Clare Estate Vishnu Temple, In 1928 toured India; in 1932 made an extensive tour with his wife throughout the Union by car; in 1934 visited Europe. fs a generous donor to all charitable appeals, Address ¢ (Res.) 77, Woodforc Rd.. Durban, Natal. BARNABUS, Bernard, Principal of Cato Manor Government-.Aided Indian School: 6. Durban: edrc. Durban. Peblee activities + Executive member of the Natal Indian ‘Teachers’ (Bus.) SO1-3, Umgeni biographies in the first section af the time of going to press. BALLIM, Ahmed ; e. s, of Mohamed Ballim ; 6. Ladysmith, January 15, 1899; educ Goverament In- dian School, Lady- smith and Higher Grade School, Durban. Was in private em- ployment as book- keeper in Johannes- burg, Zeerust and Ladysmith. Opened business in Durban in year 1925 and is the sole owner of the well- known firm of Ballim Bros., Umgenit Road, Durban. Public achvi- : fees ; Took many leading parts in sport in Ladysmith. Founder af the Ottoman Football and Cricket Club ; also one of the founders of the Ladysmith Muslim library, was hon, secty, of that institution for many years. Was presdt. of the WLR.DIEAA.. repstd. this body on the Natal Assocn. Played football for the Ladysmith Indian F.C, and cricket for the Ladysmith Ottoman ©.C. Founder and chairman of the Umgent Muslim Assocn. ; presdt. of the Cadery Islamic Society, Umgeni; chairman of the Queen's Bridge Mosque and Madressa, Is also patron and v.-presdt. of many sporting and social bodies in the Umegeni district. Hobbles - Reading and travelling. ‘Kwice visited India. Address» 1267, Umgeni Rd., Phone 1070, Durban, Natal. BHANA Lalla, mer- chant; 6 India. On arrival in this country settled in the ‘lrans- vaal. Joined his brother, Sana Lalla, in general dealer's busi- ness in Bethal, Public achuilies ¢ \ promin- ent member and South Africa, stayed at his residence in Pretoria. He had been visited by Mr. Sastri and other Indian leaders. Though of a retiring disposition, he was Natal. Society. Interested in all matters affecting the wel- fare of Indian youth. 4d- worker in the cause of the Prajapatt com- second to none in working quietly for the cause, dress: Government-Aided munity of the Prans- contributing both time and large sums of money. for othe HELMLEN, 3 Indian School, Cato Manor, vaal and overseas. elddress > 336, Vermuelen St., P.O. Box 892, Phone : at the end af | Durban, Natal. clddress : O. Box 579, Pretoria, ‘Transvaal. 130, Bethal, Transvaal. +o

---

