# Who's Who (1936-37)

**Book ID:** whos-who-1936-pt5
**Total Pages:** 17

---

## Page 1

150 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO VATHER, Somchand Panachand ; 2. Jam- Nagar, Nathiwar, 1876; educ. Jamnagar; 2 5. —Damjee Somcehand Vather and = Navin- chandra Somchand Vather. Came to South Africa in 1897, settled first in Durban, In 1902 transferred interests to Maritzburg, and traded asa genera) dealer; in 1925 ad- mitted his sons into the business, which now trades in the firm name of S. P. Vather & Sons, Fubhe ac- Nvities Trustee of the Veda Dhrama Sabha, estab- lished by Swami Shankeranand + patron of the Vidya Parcharee Sabha; cornmuttee member of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha ; member of the N.I.C.: has been staunch worker in the field of social and religious advancemett; keen on the propagation of the vernacular language; a strong financial supporter of these causes. ddr (461, Church St., Phone $238, Pietermaritzburg, atal, VYAS, Jatashanker Pranshanker; 6. Raj- kot; dst. Kathiawar, 1878; educ. Rajkot Kathiawar High School. After leaving school went to Southern India, remaining there for 3 years, Returned to Rajkot and in 1896 on advice of Mahatma (then Mr.) Gandhi came to South Africa with his brothers. Was at the same school and a contemporary of the nationalist leader, Re- mained in South Africa until the Boer War, then went back to India. On outbreak of war was sent away to l.ourenco Marques. Entered Natal in 1901; a year later returned to Transvaal, settling in Pretoria, where opened general dealer’s business and a bookkeeping agency. Has been closely associated with Mr. Gandhi, who stayed with him in Pretoria, He was in charge of the Pretoria office of Mr. Gandhi. During the passive resistance movement, his house was the Pretoria headquarters of the Mahatma. After the struggle, Mr. C. F. Andrews, who had arrived in ADEE, Amod Ismail; 6. Transvaal, 1906; ed. Government Indian School, Johannesburg. After _. schooling, joined business of his uncle, L.A. Cajec, at Nrugersdorp, trading in firm name of The Bombay House. Is now in charge of the business, as well as that of Ismail & Co., Krugersdorp, and has branch at Vereeniging in name of Wadce & Co. He is enterprising in all public work and his South African outlook, in matters of public interest, is appreciated by all sections of the community. Is secty. of Krugersdorp Indian Assoen. and was one of those prominently associated in securing the sports ground for the Indian community, In all work affecting his community he has taken a leading part; keenly interested in sport, being secty. Keugersdorp [ndian Ottoman C.C Address » 38, Market St., Krugersdorp, Phone 201, Bos 84, Krugersdorp, ‘Transvaal. Interpreter- Clerk, Dept. of Justice, Union Public Servic b. Durban, 1880; suc- . ceeded his father, who had retired on pension, as Indian Interpreter at the Durban Prisons in 1900. Transferred in 1922 to Ladysmith as Justice Dept. Inter- preter on the Magis- trate’s staff. In 1933 transferred to Durhan Magistrate's Offtce as Indian Interpreter- Clerk to the Ist and 2nd Civil Courts. Has taken a prominent part in Muslim charitable organisa- tions and together with another, founded the Society Anjuman-Esha-a-tul Islam of which he is trustee and chairman of the council. Was elected trustee to represent Colonial-born Muslims on the Board of Trustees of the Jumma Masjid Trust, the largest in South Africa. Later resigned owing to transfer to eadysmith ; was a keen sportsman and has played cricket and football as carly as 1896. He is an cx- presdt. of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. and also of the Klip River District Indian Football Assocn. and is life v.-presdt, of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. He still takes an active part in sport and tolds Official, posts of other sporting organisations. Was chairman of the Reception Committec of the All-India Soccer team when it visited South Africa in 1934. Is marricd and has 8 children, including 5 sons who have distinguished themselves in various sports. Two of them have had inter-provincial ronours, one has gained his South African cap. Hobbies: shooting and fishing. Address : Law Courts, Durban, Y ine D. Fakir; a S oe) a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 151 BIOGRAPHIES — SE CTION TL. Owing to the delay in the forwarding of photographs, tt has been found im possible to classify the following AHMED, Moosa Ebrahim ; Commissioner for Oaths for the district of Pictermaritzburg, Natal, 1933. Fay further reference sce page 34. ALFRED, Ramsamy Ramudu; #. Black- burn Fstate, near Dur- ban, W905 educ Durban. On leaving schoal was connected with the N.G.R Catering Dept from 1901, Resigned in 1912, While in employ- ment, served Dr. Starr Jameson, Sir Matthew Nathan and other distinguished persons. Started own business, as caterer, was responsible for the calering arrangements of the functions given to the Hon. G. IX. Gokhale, when he visited Durban in 1912. Was in private employment from 1915-1932 and simultaneously carried on own business as general dealer. Now occupied entirely with his own business, Public actraities : Patron of the Vedic Senmarka Society Government-Aided School, Sea Cow Lake, which he was invited to open in 1930; committee member, Gandhi Aided School, Durban. Sentamil Government- Has presented a number of trophies to encourage sport, one to the Df. Hotel Employes’ Assocn., one to Sydenham and another to Maritzburg Grade Schools --presdt., - REL: ‘7 Was presdt., Stamford Hill b.C.: Sydenham F.C. and Higher trustee, Clare Estate Vishnu Temple, In 1928 toured India; in 1932 made an extensive tour with his wife throughout the Union by car; in 1934 visited Europe. fs a generous donor to all charitable appeals, Address ¢ (Res.) 77, Woodforc Rd.. Durban, Natal. BARNABUS, Bernard, Principal of Cato Manor Government-.Aided Indian School: 6. Durban: edrc. Durban. Peblee activities + Executive member of the Natal Indian ‘Teachers’ (Bus.) SO1-3, Umgeni biographies in the first section af the time of going to press. BALLIM, Ahmed ; e. s, of Mohamed Ballim ; 6. Ladysmith, January 15, 1899; educ Goverament In- dian School, Lady- smith and Higher Grade School, Durban. Was in private em- ployment as book- keeper in Johannes- burg, Zeerust and Ladysmith. Opened business in Durban in year 1925 and is the sole owner of the well- known firm of Ballim Bros., Umgenit Road, Durban. Public achvi- : fees ; Took many leading parts in sport in Ladysmith. Founder af the Ottoman Football and Cricket Club ; also one of the founders of the Ladysmith Muslim library, was hon, secty, of that institution for many years. Was presdt. of the WLR.DIEAA.. repstd. this body on the Natal Assocn. Played football for the Ladysmith Indian F.C, and cricket for the Ladysmith Ottoman ©.C. Founder and chairman of the Umgent Muslim Assocn. ; presdt. of the Cadery Islamic Society, Umgeni; chairman of the Queen's Bridge Mosque and Madressa, Is also patron and v.-presdt. of many sporting and social bodies in the Umegeni district. Hobbles - Reading and travelling. ‘Kwice visited India. Address» 1267, Umgeni Rd., Phone 1070, Durban, Natal. BHANA Lalla, mer- chant; 6 India. On arrival in this country settled in the ‘lrans- vaal. Joined his brother, Sana Lalla, in general dealer's busi- ness in Bethal, Public achuilies ¢ \ promin- ent member and South Africa, stayed at his residence in Pretoria. He had been visited by Mr. Sastri and other Indian leaders. Though of a retiring disposition, he was Natal. Society. Interested in all matters affecting the wel- fare of Indian youth. 4d- worker in the cause of the Prajapatt com- second to none in working quietly for the cause, dress: Government-Aided munity of the Prans- contributing both time and large sums of money. for othe HELMLEN, 3 Indian School, Cato Manor, vaal and overseas. elddress > 336, Vermuelen St., P.O. Box 892, Phone : at the end af | Durban, Natal. clddress : O. Box 579, Pretoria, ‘Transvaal. 130, Bethal, Transvaal. +o

---

## Page 2

152 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO BILLIMORIA, Ambaram Lallo ; see page 44 for hto- graphy. CASSIM, Moosa, merchant’ , India. On arrival in South Africa settled in the Transvaal, eventually taking up permanent residenee at Zeerust, where started general dealer's business, which to-day is one of the leading concerns in that area, Public activities» Chairman of the Zeerust Indian community and holds other important posi- tions, Address: P.O, Box 37, Phone 7, Zeerust, ‘Transvaal. BUGHWAN, R., photographer ; &. Dur- ban, 1874; ede. Durban, — Joint pro- prietor, Bughwan & Co., The Crown Studio. Public actryities : Formerly prominently connected with public affairs ; took a leading part in the passive resistance Movementin 1913, arrested) as one of the Durban leaders. One of the earliest Indian sportsmen, con- nected with football, cricket, cycling, etc. One of the foundation members of the D.D.).1.A. and the N.ILF.AN.. being its life v.-presdt.. captained Natal Cricket team against Griqualand West in the Barnato Cup tourna- ment; v.-presdt. of this competition ; was v.-presdt., S.A. Coloured Cricket Union; was a leading racing cychst. captured many trophies, captained the Durban Indian Amateur Cycling Club, 1893; captained Pirates F.C. and C.C. for many years, Presdt., Natal Hindustani Assocn., 1916. Occupation Professional Photographer Artist. .fddress - 162. Grey St., Durban, Natal. CASSIMJEE, Amod; 6. Surat City, 1879: educ. Surat. Came to South Africa in 1895. Settled in Pieter- maritzburg. On his arrival Joined his brother's firm of Sule- man Cassimjcee & Co. Soon after proceeded to Kranskop, where he opened his own busi- hess. After trading for a time returned to Manitzburg, where he started the firm of Amod Mahomed & Co. On the cissolution of the partnership in 1913 hecame sole proprictor, then changed the name of the firm to Amod Cassimjcc, which has grown to be one of the leading Indian firms of Pietermaritzburg. Public activities; Has becn keenly interested in the welfare of the Muslims as well as the Indian com- munity as a whole; laid the foundation for the estab- lishment of the Mohomedan Oriental School (now Government-aided). 1s ever prepared to assist all movements directed for the good of the community. address: 65/67, Church St., Phone 3328, Picter- maritzburg, Natal. CASSIMJEE, Ismail Amod ; ¢. 9. of Amod Cassimjee; 6, Surat. 1903: educ. Higher Grade Government In- dian School, Maritz- burg, and private study. On leaving school entered father’s business of Amod Cassimjee, general dealers. Has also his own store of drapers and outfitters — The Paramount Building— trading in his name of Ismail Amod. Has contributed largely to the amenities of upper Church Street by the erection of two fine business structures. Public activities : Weenly interested in all matters connected with the Indian community Address: 82'84, Church St., Phone 3828, Pieter- maritzburg, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 153 CHARLES, Bertwell Warren; c. s. of Percival Charles Soobraya Naidoo ; member, Church of Engtand ; educ. Passed T.4 anc National Senior Certificate, Master Craftsman cabinet making, Johanne - burg. 1916—1920; a. 1929, Mabel, 2nd ad. of 1. M. Naidoo, C.S.; Tos. tod Presdt.. Port Shepstone District Indian Cricket Union. Chairman, Port Shepstone Indian Referees’ Board, (for further reference, see page AS). CHETTY, Guru- samy Balasubra- mania: 6. Mauritius, 1893 edue. Higher Grade Government Indian School, Durban, and private study 1 ne. d, of late P. N. Chetty, of Pietermaritzburg. Was a legal clerk for some time, Started own business as a manufacturer in 1921 ; joint proprietor of the Standard Cigar Co., Durban, Publee actri- ties: Former secty., for 12 vears, of the S.V. Temple, Umgeni Road, Durban; Secty.. Tamil Agam, an institution for the advancement of the Tamil language. Durban ; former chairman of Young Men’s Vedic Society of which now life v.-presdt.; was executive member of the N.L.C.; a keen worker in the cause of Hindu progress. A staunch supporter of the use of the vernacular, which he himself uses with great abiltty. Hobby: Tamil literature. and a contributor to the Tamil newspapers. Address: (Res.) 110. Gale St. (Bus.) 73, Carlisle St., Phone C. 3496. Tel. asidress : “Pompadour,"’ Durban, Natal. CHETTY, Manicum, merchant ; b, Newcastle ; edie, St. Oswald's Government-Aided School. On leaving school joined uncle’s business of general dealer at Newcastle. On the latter’s death, took over full control, Public activihies : Secty. of the Neweastle Branch of the South African Colonial-Born and Settlers’ Indian Assocn.; v.-presdt., N.D LEA. and is a keen sportsman, playing soccer and tennis, Holds many other official positions. Address: P.O, Box 70, Newcastle, Natal. CHOUDREE, Ashwin; Commissioner for Oaths for the district of Durban, Natal 1935. For further yeference sce pase 52. CHRISTOPHER, Albert, D.C.M., Advocate ctc. educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban, and Lincoin’s Inn where he was called to the Bar, Presdt., Colonial Born and Scttlers’ Indian Assocn. | Held highest offices in the [Indian public and sporting life of South Africa. Recipient of the King’s Silver Jubilee Medal. Served in the Great War in East Africa as non-commissioned officer, awarded — Distinguished Conduct Medal. Address (Res.) 528 Berea Kd. Phone Toll Gate 7829. (Bus.) Madoline Bldgs., Smith St., Durban, Natal. CHRISTOPHER, Oswald James jedic. South African Native College, Fort Hare, Is engaged in business. Public activities ¢ Executive member of the South African In- dian Congress; secty., NLC. (Newcastle Branch); repstd. Natal at S.A.1.C. Con- ferences; presdt.. Newcastle Indian Football Assocn., one of the founders of this body. A keen public worker, taking a lead- ing part in all public matters of Newcastle and district. Presdt.. Northern District Tennis Assen., 1935, Address P.O. Bos 6, Phone 44, Newcastle, Natal. DAWSON, Ponrajoo Michael; 4. Tranquebar, Madras, May 1, 1866; educ. St. Joseph's College. Yrichnapoly ; om. Jate Harrict. v. d. of late E. Hutton, Kimberley. Came to South Africa in 1887, settled in Kimberley, where he has remained ever since. En- gaged in cafe business. Public activities : Presdt, of the Kimberley Political Assocn.; repstd. Kimberley at various conferences of the S.A.1.C.; appeared before the Lange Commission ; one of the founders of the Indian Women's Assocn. ; presdt. of the Catholic Indian Men's Assoen.: prominently connected with practically ¢€ pubhe event during his long stay in Kimberley. One of the leading sports ad- ministrators: former presdt. of the South African Indian Football Assocn.. occupying the position at the time of its foundation ; presdt., for many years of the G.W.LE.A.; one of those instrumental in securing for South African Inclian soccer the Sam China Cup, being a friend of the donor, Hobby: Public work. dddress : (Res.) 143, Transvaal Rel, Kim- berley, Cape Province. 5 a DIYARAM, Nagarbhai; 6. Navasari, dist. Surat, 1890; educ. Navasari. Came to South Africa in 1904, and settling in Johannesburg, was in private employment till 1911, when started own business as merchant tailor, Fublic activities ; Is prominently identified with the work of his caste group. .fddress - 212, Market St., Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 3

154 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO DEEN, Mahomed Ismail; b. Ladysnuth, Natal, March 12, 1893; educ, Ladysmith, First was in private employ- ment; in 1928 started own business as fresh produce dealer, with which he is still con nected. Public acti. lies An organiser of the Muslim) Library ; during the war col- lected money for the Governor-General's Fund at Vryheid. Was an active soccer player, captain and secty. of the Savages F. Club; i repstd. Klip River in Natal Inter-town Competition soccer; former secty. of the Vryheid F.C.) captain of the Ottoman F.C. : captain, Schools’ F.C. Donated a shield for soccer competitions among Natal Natives. Address: 46, Ming Road, Ladysmith, Natal. DESAI, Dawood Moosa, Merchant: 6 Yad- keshwar, dzsf. Surat, 1885; educ. Vadkeshwar. Came to South Africa in 1896, worked in various parts of the Province, including Dannhauser, Newcastle and Umzinto. In 1918 opened own store at Wartburg, trading in the firm name of D. M. Desai & Co.; opened branch store af Mersey Halt. Is the owner of a sery flourishing business, Publee activelics : Member of the Tadkeshwar Educational Society and mterested in the public welfare of the community. Has given generously to all public funds, including towards the erection of the Madressa at Greytown. Chib : Orient. Address Phone LI, Vel. \dd., “Desai,” P.O, Warthurg, Natal. DESAI, Moosa Fssop; 0. ‘Yadkeshwar, disf. Surat, IS83 5 cduc Tadkeshwar. Came to South \fnea in E896, stayed first in Durban and district. In 1914 took up residence in Port Shepstenedistrict. Commenced his own business in 1918 at Marburg; in [921 came to Port Shepstone, where he is the Jeading Indian business man, having oncof the largest country stores in Natal. Public actiridics : Chairman of the Port Shepstone and District Indian Mercantile Association; chairman and trustee of the ‘ladkeshwar Society. Takes a leading part mm the Indian affairs of the district. Presided at the functions held in honour of the visit of the Agent-General, Kunwar Sir Maharaj and Lady Singh, who stayed at his house, 1934. Addvess ; Al, Reynold Street, P.O. Box 16, Phone 70, Tel. Add. “Whitehouse,” Port Shepstone, Natal. DHANJEE, Ramijee; b, India. Came to South Africa in 1890. Is engaged in general dealer's business at Verulam, trading in own name. Public ac hewdies : Served with Mr. Gandhi, in the In- dian Bearer Corps in the Boer War, and was under General Buller in the Siege of Lady- smith, 1900. Partici- pated in the Passive Resistance movement of 1918. Presented to H.R.H Prince of Wales when he visited Verulam, as an ex-serviceman, Repstd. Natal at the S A.LC, Conference in Cape Town, 1926. Appeared. on behalf of Verulam Indian Committee, as a witness before the Education Inquiry Committee, Pieter- maritzburg, 1928. Takes a kcen interest in all Indian public activities. Address ¢ 36, Wick St. Tel address: “Dhanjee,’ Verulam, Natal. DOOKRAN, Raj- nunnan; 6. Pieter- maritzburg, Oct, 15, 1900 ; educ. Esther Payne Smith Railway Indtan School, Passed Indian Teachers’ Cert. Examination (Junior) 1912, (Senior) 1914 and V4 1984. Com- menced teaching on the staff of St. Silas Government-Aided In- cian School, Suther- lands. Aug. 9, 1912, transferred to Railway School promated headmaster 1916. Public activities : Presdt. of the Midlands Indian Schools’ F.A.. — treas. of the Maritzburg County Assucn.; delegate to the NULF.ALS committee member of the S.P.C.A.; member of the Indo-European Joint Council; auditor of the N.I.U.S. (P.M.Burg Branch): representative of the non-European J and Owners’ Assocn. ta the authorities, J» Sport: Repstd. Maritzburg in Inter. town matches, 1927; plaved cricket for the M.LC.C, and a member of the Plessislacr Tennis Club, isited Transvaal and P.R.A., 1934. Recreation : Tennis address: (Res.) P.O. Plessislaer, (Bus.) E. Payne Smith Government-Aided School, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Rp THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN \V¥HO'S WHO 135 DUNGARSHI, Morarjee, merchant . b. India. On arrival in this country, settled im the T ul, tuking up permanent residence at Louis Vrichardt. Here engaged in business as general merchant and Importer. Has twenty branch stores in the district. wlddress P.O. Box 7, Phone 26. Tel. address: “Dangarshi,”” Louis Vrichardt, Transvaal. EBRAHIM, Mahomed; 6. Karod, disf. Surat, Oct. 17, 1879; educ. Karod and Boys’ Model School, Durban. Came to South Africa in 1892; first stayed in Pinetown, after 18 months scttled in Durban, where he has resided ever since. Started own busitess as general dealer at the Point in 1894, opened wholesale branch mm Pine Street. Retired in 1918. Public activities; Cormmenced at the time of Mr. Gandhi's residence in Durban, 1896: secty., Natal Indian Congress, 1913; azting chairman, Natal Indian Congress during the arrest of the Indian leaders in the passive resistance movement; secty., Red Crescent Society and responsible. among others, for collecting £27 000 for Turkish relief during Italan- Turkish war in ‘lripoli. bormer presdt., and now chairman (three years) of the Orient Club. Keen on educational uplift, has a son studying medicine in Edinburgh, and his other children, two sons and two daughters, are well educated. Visited all parts of India 1920 and in 1927 visited Great Britain and the Continent. Addves. 333, Pine Street, Phone 2284, ‘Fel. add.: “‘Ebrahim,’”? Durban. Natal. ESSA, Allei; 6 Ashod, dest. Amod, 1880. Came to South Africa in 1904, took up residence in Cape Town. Engaged in business, sole proprietor of the Cape Fruit Supply Co., wholesale fruit and produce merchants. Is a large property owner, Publte activities ; Treas., Cape Indian Congress treas., IXanamea Muslim League; trustee of the Mosque in Muir and Chapel St. Cape Town. Attended several Conferences of the S.A.I.C., representing Cape. Esteemed by all sections of the community. -lddvess : 52, Chapel St, phone 2281. Tel. add.:° “Sodagar,” Cape Town. GABRIEL, Alphonse Robert William, M.B., Ch.B. (Edin) 3; 2ed s. of 1.. Gabriel, Durban: edue. St. Augustine’s School, Durban, St. Joseph's High School, St. Navier's College, Calcutta, C.S.M.M.G., M.E., National Hospital and University College Hospital Schoot of Massage and Medical Gymnastics, London; am. Lily Clare, 2rd d. of Bernard ‘Luson, London. Private. Ist S.A.1.B.C., East African Cam- paign, 1915-16; Private, 37th Presidency Volunteer Rifles Battalion, Calcutta, 1917-18 ;3 medals. Address: (Res.) 115, Essendene Rd., Overport, Phone O'pt. 5284. (Bus.) 232, Grey St., Phone C. 2151, Durban, Natal. GABRIEL, Bernard, Barrister-at-Law, Lincoln's Inn, T.ondon; Advocate Supreme Court of South Africa (N.PLD.); 6. Durban, January 29, 1880; educ. Boys’ Model School, Durban and Downing College. Cambriutge University ; . Louisa. @. of H. Velkoop, Durban. During Boer War was besieged in Ladysmith and acted as medical assistant andl inter- preter, Member of the NLC fddress + 472, West St., Durban, Natal. GABRIEL, Lazarus; 2ud s. of late P. Gabriel of Mysore and Durban, an early settler and pioneer; b. Nov. 2, 1873) Durban; edue. Durban ; ow, Marie Eugenie, « ¢. of Louis James Teleste of Maur- itius. 5s. Prblie ac- fvitres : Foundation member of (original) Natal Indian Congre 1894, and took part in all Indian activities from that date During Anglo-Boer War 1899 acted as leader of Vol- teer Ambulance Corps at Colenso and Spion Kop under Gen. Buller, for which he was thanked and presented with the Queen's Medal. Was member of Indian deputation to meet the Rt. Hon. Joseph Chamberlain, during his visit to Durban. Was hon. secty., Natal Indian Assocn., welcomed Hon G. K. Gokhale; conducted the great demonstration in Durban and district during the passive resistance movement, which culminated in the repeal of the £3 tax, 1913. Hon. secty., S.At. Congress (Durban branch) during the Class Areas Bill agitation and Robertson Commission, 1919. Presdt.. Natal Provincial Football Assocn., 1912: was chiefly instrumental in raising the South African Indian Bearer Corps in 1914, for active service East African campaign. Formed 1.B.C. Comforts Com- mittee and was secty. till end of the War; secty., Indian Investigation Committee of the Governor- General's Fund, and member of Mayor's Relief Fund, Durban; joint hon. secty., Indian War Memorial Committee, Durban: v.-presdt., Colonial-Born and Indian Settlers’ Assocn. Hobbres : Tishing and gardening. Clrbs - Durban Indian Club. fddrexs - (Res.) ‘“FEssendene House.”’ 115, Essendene Road, Sydenham, Durban. + > GAJJAR, Lalloo Trikamdas ; 6. Vedchha dist. Surat, 1883 ; educ. Vedchha. Two daughters and five sons, Maganlal, Chatalal, Nagmlal, Harilal and Kalyanjee Came to South Africa in 1905, first stayed in Cape Town, a year afterwards moved to Citenhage. where he started business as fruit and vegetable forwarding agent; has two branch stores, also a cabinet and furniture manufacturing department. Public activites ; One ot the leading Indian public men in this area, and has always been associated with all matters affecting the Indian community ; presdt., Vitenhage Hindu Mundal, repsd. this centre at the Hindu Maha Sabha Conference in Durban, 1934 ; v.-presdt., Cape British Indian Council. Address: 4, John St, Phone 194, Uitenhage, Cape Province.

---

## Page 4

156 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO GANDHI, Abhce- chand Amritlal; /. Porbundar, 1874: edie. in India. Came to South Africa in 1896 and settled in Trans- vaal. Virst in Pre- toria, then Pietersburg, since 1899 in Tongaat. Natal. Startect own business in the Trans- vaal 1896 till 1899. 1900 in Tongaat, in partnership, in the name of A. A. Gandhi until 1931, when the business was converted into a company, of which he was elected a life director, Public activities » Served in the Indian Bearer Corps during the Boer War, at Ladysmith and Estcourt; treas. of the Vishwaroop Temple and Dharamsala for 17 years: as official of this temple took an active part in the 1918 influenza epidemic ; was v.-chairman of the Natal Indian Congress of the Yongaat branch; took leading part in the building of the Gokhale Memorial Hall, Tongaat. Address : (Durban) 112, Victoria St., Phone C. 2198. Head Office: P.O, Box 27, Phone 5, Tongaat, Natal. GANGARAM, Daya; merchant tailor, b, Navasari, dist, Baroda, 1898 ; edwe, Navasari. In 1912 started own business as merchant tailors in Durban, Now managing director of Gangaram (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities : Member of the Natal Indian Congress ; mem- ber, Surat Dargi Assocn.; interested in all public movements affecting his commun- ity. Addvess : (Bus.) 44-46, Quecn St, Phone Central 2498, Durban, Natal. GOPAUL, Leo Rajah; 5. Pietermaritzburg; edie. Boys’ Model School, Pietermaritzburg; was a legal clerk for many years; now conducts own business of general agency in Durban, Public activities ; Took prominent part in arranging the reception of the Hon. G. KK. Gokhale when he visited P M.Burg, 1912; was a strong Passive Rosister during the strike of 1913. Held many other positions. Is a fluent speaker and writer, whose pen has often been used in the advocacy of the rights of the Indian community. is a keen student of law. Address : 107a, Queen St., Phone C. 4330, Durban, Natal. GEORGE, Vincent, headmaster; — &. Sept. 22, I8S9L; Sth s. of Soobiah ; educ. Higher Grade Government Indian School, Durban; wm. Evangelina, d, of S. Albert Muthukrish- na, 1918. Started teiching career on the staff of the Tongaat Government-Aided In- dian School, 1916-19; Was headmaster Dar- nal! Government- Aided Indian Sehool, 1919-26; headmaster, Methodist Government- Aided Indian School, Maritzburg since 1926. Public activities : Asst. secly., Tongaat Influenza Relief Committee, 1918; chairman, Natal Indian Teachers’ Society (Maritzburg Branch). 1929-30; presdt., Midlands Indian Schools’ Football Assocn., 1928-30; “Minister of Health,’ Maritzburg Indian Parliamentary Debating Society ; v.-presdt., Social Fraternity Club, Maritzburg; v.-presdt., Aryan Benevolent Society, Maritzburg; v.-presdt., Methodist Indian Ciub, Maritzburg. .fddress : 11, Thomson St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. GOKAL, V., merchant and importer; 0. India. On arrival in South Africa settled in the Jransvaal. Opened general dealer's business at Louis Trichardt, has also several branch stores —— 411, Kruger Street; 949, Waterboom ; Klein Astralia ; 83, Vyge Boomsdrift. Address; Box 23, Phone 84, Louis Trichardt, Trans- vaal. HAFFEJEE, Hajee Ebrahim Ismail; ¢.s. of Hajee Ismail Mo- hamed Haffejee, donor of the Musafirkhana ; b. Durban, 1910; edue. Carlisle Street Govern- ment Indian School and Marine College, Durban, On leaving school joined father’s business of Amod Haffeiee (Pty.), Ltd., of which he is the secty. here are three branch stores. Public activities Weenly in- terested in the activi- ties of the Young Muslims ; treas., Muslim Institute ; committee member, Muslim Youths’ League. fa Sport» Member, Durban Indian Sports Ground Committee; chairman, Muslim Cricket Club; committee member, D.D.LPF.A.: committee member, D.D.1.C.U. Mare a_ pilgrimage to Mecea, 1929. Club: Ozone. Address: (Res.) 26, Carlisle St. (Bus.) 99, Vield St., Phone C, 4680, Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 1 wl “I HAJEE, Hafiz Hoosen Mahomed Badat, retired merchant; 4. Surat City, 1865; educ. Surat. Came to South Africa in I887 after visiting Calcutta, Rangoon and Mauritius. On arrival settled in Maritz- burg, where started own business of gencral dealer in Commercial Koad and Church Street. Has now retired, Large property owner. Puble aectiutics : Ever since his arrival took part in the work of the community, one of those who was responsible for starting the Surat Suni Mosque and Madressa, 1900. Was a member of Indian deputation, headed by M. K. Gandhi, to England, 1909; v.-presdt., Natal Indchan Congress ; a trustee of the Mosque and Mactressa, Maritzburg, .fddress 72, Church St., Pictermaritz- burg, Natal. HARIBHAI, Ghela ; 6. Kasba, Navasari, Baroda State, 1886; educ. Navasari, Came to South Africa, settling in) Durban in 1897. After a period of pri- vate employment, started own business as merchant tailors in 1918. Public activities: Presdt.of the Parsuram Yailors’ Assocn. Has taken a prominent part in the activities con- cerning his organisa- tion. Is interested in alf public work of the Indian community. Address: (Bus.) 5 and 7, Victoria St., Phone Cenfral 3808, Durban, Natal. HIMUNCHUL, Mangaly Chunden ; 6. Howick, May 21, 1885; 0. s. of Chunden Himunchul ; edie, Ladysmith. After school joined father's business of general dealer. For a period was engaged as a photo- grapher, later cabinet maker, and now motor trimmer. Publ ac- tivities ; Was v.- presdt., K.R. DLT. ELA, of which he was one of the founders; was a soccer enthusiast repstd. Klip River im Natal intertown matches. //obbies - Fishing and shooting, Address - 20, Murchison St.. Ladysmith, Natal. JANOO, O. A., merchant, 6. Bhanavad, Nathiwar, On arrival in South Africa took up residence in the Transvaal. Soon after opened general dealer's business, now established as general merchants and direct rmporters at Silverbank, Greylingstad. Is highly respected as a businessman in the district by all sections of the community, Is keen on education, providing facilities for all his children. Takes an intelligent interest in all matters affecting the Indian community. dddyess : Phone 2, Oudehoutcdraai, P.O. Box 12, Greylingstad, Transvaal. JEENA, Chagan Narotam, merchant ; b, Natal: cdme, Dur- ban, Leaving schoo entered father’s busi- ness of general dealer, on the latter’s death in 1930 took ful charge : has succeeded in developing business on a fairly large scale. Publre actruiltes : Interested on al matters affecting social, religious anc general progress of the Indian community, vlddvess Amanzim- toti. JEENA (born Har- govan) Mrs. K.; +. India. Arrived in this country with her late husband whom she as- sisted in improving his general dealer's busi- ness at Amanzimtoti. She is the mother of Chagan Narotam Jeena -lddress 3 Amanzim- toti. KAJEE, Ahmed Sadeck ; 6. Durban, 1904: ¢. s. of late M.A. Kajee, ot Mapumulo and Thring’s Post, in the Division of I.ower Tugela; edie. Indian Education- al Institute and Higher Grade Schoul, Durban. On leaving school joined father’s business. On father’s death in 1918 took charge of all business interests. Opened on own account the West Street firm of Kajee Bros. in 1933 Public activities Committee member of the N. I, Congress ; repstd. Natal at South African Indian Congress conferences; trustee of Madressa Anjuman Islan, Durban; trustee of the Madressa Ronukal Islam of WKathor, India; former trustee of the Stanger Madressa Anjuman Islam. A keen public worker. Address : 492, West St, Phone C. 66, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 5

158 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO KALIDAS, Pranjivan Noratam ; b. Navasari, 1906; educ. Navasari and Pretoria. Came to South Africa in 1910 and later joined father in tailoring business in Johannesburg. Subsequently removed to Brits. In additron started general dealer's business in Brits, with which he is still connected. Has becn entirely connected with commerce, succeeding m developing his business on a fatrly substantial scale. address; Box 46, Phone 23, Brits. Transvaal. KATHRADA, Goolam Hoosen Amod ; mercitant ; b. Verulam, t900. educ. Higher Grade Government Indian School, Durban. Junior partner in the firm of Amod Kathrada & Son. Verulam. Public activities Keenly interested in all public movements affecting the Indian community ; one of the founders of the Verulam Mohamedan School, served as secty. and now again its secty. ; one of the founders of the Veru- lam Young Muslims’ Society; secty., three years, Orient Club, Isipingo. Visited India 1911 and again in 1921. One of the prominent merchants of Verulam and popular with both Eurcpeans and Indians. Clubs - Orient and Ozone, Durban North. — Recreations - Tennis. .dddress - 62, Wick St.. Phone 9, Verulam, Natal. KAZI, Abdul Hack ; &. Rander, 1876; edie. Rander and Boys’ Model School, Durban. Came to South Africa in 1889, settled in Dur- ban. After school worked for Parsee Rustomjee. under whom he served his apprenticeship in com- merce, Started own business in 1901, since then has several branch stores. I» well known by the Zulu name of Rwamdhlambuzi. by whom he is highly r pected. Public actt This dates from 1900, having taken part in all tue activities concerning the Indian community; a col- league of Mahatma Gandhi; the first secty. of the Natal Indian Assocn Jook part in the passive resistance movement of 1913. being one of the leaders to be arrested. Served on Gekhale’s Reception Committee, 1912. Onc of those responsible for starting the N.I.C., repstd. this body at several sessions of the S.ALLC. enav -presdt. of the N.I.C. since its forma- tion. Connected with all other public affairs. During the 1918 depressron rendered conspicuous service in the cause of Indian commerce of this country, he was presented with an address from the Natal Indian Merchants’ Assoen. in appreciation of his work. During the Class Areas Bill agitation, rendered great service which made it possible for the sending out of the South African Indian deputation to Incia, 1925. J Sport. He hax been a keen s being an active footballer and cricketer ; a playing member of the Fastern Stars F.C. and Greyville Pirates and Ottoman C.C.'s + was captain of the last-mentioned, 1912-18, Repstd. Durban in intertown cricket. vlddress ; 121, Field St., Phone C, 2919, Durban, Natal. KHANDERIA, Mohanlal Manekchand ;_ writing from the Secretariat, Wankaner, April 28, 1935, the Dewan (Chief Minister), Mr. I. IKK. Pandya, B.A, LU... states : “Tam desired by His Highness the Maharana Rajsaheb to hereby certify that Mr, Mohanlal M. (Khanderia, an inhabitant of Wankaner — (1} Was clected by the pubhe of Wankaver as a member of the Raj Sabha (2.¢., the !.ocal Council of State} ; (2) Was elected as Vice-President of the Wankaner Victoria Jubilee [abrary ; (3) Is entitled to be present at the Raj Wacher (/e.. Ceremonial Darbar held occasionally); (4) Is eligil-le as an assessor in the Sir Nyayadhish Court (7¢., the Chef Court of Criminal tustice) in) Wankaner State; and (5) [y a loyal and prominent citizen of Wankaner.”' Takes a keen interest in social reforms of the com- munity. He is v.-presdt. of the exccutive committee of his section in Vankaner, Acted several times as head of relief committee in times of famine at Vankaner, Keen on education, always prepared to assist deserving students. Foy further reference see : Khanderia, M., p 88. KHARVA, Hajee Is- mail Amod b. Surat, India, 1886. Came to South Africa in 1893 to join father, who established business in Ladysmith in 1887, under the style of Amod Mahomed. Pre- vious to establishing business in Ladysmith had business houses in Pretoria and Howick. After the death of his father (Amod Ma- homed Wharva) in 1915, took over the sole charge of the business. Went on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1908, After taking control of his father’s business, which is stell run under the style of A. M. Kharva. proved himself successful in commerce. Public activities During the Great World War was the first Indian in Ladysmith who took the responsibility of inaugurating the Governor- General's Fund in Ladysmith, Also offered his services ay a soldier, but was refused. In 1913 took active part in the Passive Resistance Movement under Mr. Ghandi. Also took prominent part in the pubhe affairs of the town, socially, educationally, and politically. A chairman of the Natal Indian Congress (Ladysmith branch) from 1926-1935. During the great floods of 1923 and 1925 took active part, bringing relief and comfort to the distressed people. In 1928 took up the matter to provide separate waiting room for Indian ladies with the Railway Administration, which proved successful. Keenly interested in all branches of sport. Still official and supporter of several sporting bodies in the district. Actively associated with the workings of the Ladysmith Madressa and Mosque. Trustee of the Mosque Board ; under his term of office the New Mosque and Madressa was erected. A charitable donor to many a worthy cause. Addvess : Murchison St., Ladysmith, a THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WRO 159 KOOVERJEE, Bhika; merchant Breyten, Traunsvaat, Biography appears on page 90. KRISHNASAMY, Vurdiah, also known as V. Kristy ; 6. Pieter- maritzbure, Peb. 5, 1902 > y. s. of Vurdtah Naidoo: educ. Indian High School, Maritz- burg. On leaving schoo! engaged in busi- NESS | proprietor of Kristy & Co., Market Agents. Maritzburg, Publie actrvitics Committce member of the NIC. (P.M B. Branch) ; repstd. Natal at the S.A.LC. Con- ference, 19. was committee member of the H.Y.MLA.: was secty., v.-presdt. of the Siva Soobramanier Hindu Temple, P.MLB.; took a prom- inent part in organising protest meetings in northern Natal against the Class Areas’ Bill, 1924; is prominently connected with social anc uplift work of the Indian Community of P.M.K. In sport, holds various official posiuons. Address: (Res.) 500, Loop St. (Bus) 10, Henrietta St.. P.O. Box 429, Preter- maritzburg, Natal. LOCKHAT, Hajee Ahmed Mamoojee Moosa ; b. Wathor, dist. Surat, IS8L; educ. Kathor, Came to South Africa in 1894, settled in Durban. Started own business in 1905, which is stit! in existence; in 1914 with A. M. Mayat, started wholesale business. He resigned from this business to carry on his own; opened Broadway Outfitters in 1930. Public activities : V.-presdt. of the Natal Indian Congress for many years; v.-presdt. of the Madressa Anjuman Islam, Durban ; v.-presdt.. Nathor Madressa Anjuman Islam Trust, Durban; presedt., Kajee and Salaimahomed Mosque Trust ; holds many other official positions and trustee of many private trusts. Made a_ pilgrimage to Mecca in 1928. Address » (Bus.) 101, Field St. and 200, Umgeni Rad. (Res.) 34, Carlisle St., Durban, Natal. MAHARAJ, Gajad- hur Sewnarain; bp. Pietermaritzburg, 1905 educ. P.M.Burg., a. d. of Jainath Maharaj, of Newecastie. On leaving schoo] was with father in business. After father’s death started transport. Later on was the first Indian to start regular bus passenger service between P.M. Burg and Durban, being prop- rietor of the Roval Bus Service. Closed on the enactment of the Motor Fransport Law Started business of undertaker. 1931, being then the first Indian in the country to be engaged in this class of business. Also proprietor of the Sportsman's Cafe. Public activities . Committee member of the Arya Samaj, P.M.Burg, member of the Veda Dharma Sabha; and holds official posts af several other societies. .tddress : (KRes.) 545. Chureh St Pieter- maritzburg, Natal. MANILAL, Par- shotam ; §. Abrama; dist, Surat, 1903 5 edue. Abrama. Came to South Africa in 1920, settled in Durban. On arrival engaged as a bookkeeper. Joined as partner the firm of Naran Harie, merchant tailors, with which he is still connected. Public activities : Secty., Parsuram Tailors’ Assocen.; was secty. of the Durban and )district Garment Making Employers’ Assocn. and secty. of the Trade Joint Council; was committee member of the Surat Hindu Assocn.; committee member of the Surat Hindu Educational Society. President Surat Hindu © C. .tddress: 136a, Vield St. Phone 3495 Central, Durban, Natal. MATHAR, Mahomed Ahmed; _ page 98 should read: MEHTAR, Mohammed Ahmed.

---

## Page 6

160 THE SOUTH AFRICAN MINTY,A. I. Bar.-at Law; b. Indra, Feb. 19, 1908. Came to South Africa in 1919, stayed with his parents at Nelspruit, Transvaal. Returned to India for study, matriculating from the Bombay Uni- versily ; proceeded to England in Sept., 1927, Called to the Bar at the Middle Temple. Returned to South Africa in 1932. In Sept., 1933 left for India, now practising in Bombay. .tddress : (S.A) P.O. Box 25, Phone 25, Tel. address ‘“‘Minty,’’ Nelspruit, Trans- vaal. MOOSA, Mahomed Amod Haffejee; 6. Durban, 1902; 2rd s. of A. H. Moosa; edie. Anglo-Vernacular IEd- ucational Institute and Carlisle Strect School, Durban. On leaving school became associ- iated with business, being the Managing Director of A. HL. Moosa & Sons and of the subsidiary —com- pany, Simplex Furni- ture Factory (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities : Kkeenly interested in all public work, mem- ber of the N.I.C., represented this Province at the S.A.LC. Conferences at Kimberley, Johannesburg and Purban. Member of the Building Committee of the Sastri College towards which his firm donated £500. One of those responsible for the Ladkeshwar Educational Society's scheme (property valued £6,500 in Victoria Street, Durban), for providing means for education in India and South Africa. Life-director, former secty. and treas. of the Orient Club. Is widely known and respected in the com- mercial and public life of the Province. slddress : (Res.) 232, Cowey Kd., Phone Central 878; (Bus.} Simplex, 64, Alice St., Phone Central 1577, Durban, Natal. MOOSA, Moosa Amod Haffejee; 8rd s. of A. H. Moosa; &. Durban, Jan, 8, 1908 ; ede. Higher Grade Government Indian School. Started com- mercial career in 1921, joining the firm of A. H. Moosa: in 1989 took charge of The White House, Port Shepstone. A director of AL Il. Moosa & Sons, Ltd.: was trustee of the Port Shepstone Mosque. One of the foundation members of the Ozone Club. In- terested in industries, particularly in manufactures, INDIAN WHO'S WHO A keen student of public affairs. Recreations : Tennis and billiards. Clubs : Ozone and Ortent. Address : {Res.} 49, Tenth Avenue, Phone Central 186. (Bus.) 62, Commercial Rd., Phone Central 1607, Durban Natal NAICKER, Thun- gavelu Murugesa ; b, Umgeni, Natal, Sept. 1889; 4 of late Kx. Murugesa Naicker, a pioneer merchant and farmer; educ. Higher Grade [ndian School, passing Natal Collect- ive Exam., Haggar's Commercial Acacemy, Durban. Heacled list Indian Teachers’ Junior Exam. Natal, 1907, following year Senior Exam. Was head- master of the Umbog- intwini Government Aided Indian School, now Isipingo (1909-1912); 1923 joined service of Natal Education Department, appointed at Umgeni Government Indian School. In the interim entered commerce as a wholesale, retail merchant and importer, with branches at Umgent and Newlands. Occastonally acted as Indian interpreter in the Native High Court, and the Supreme Court, Natal. Public activities : His communal interest and public career commenced at an early stage in his life. when he was about 16 years of age. His activities have been varied and manifold, characterised with service and devotion. Almost three decades of useful public activity stands to his credit. There is hardly any movement tending to uplift the community with which he is not associated. Some of the positions held by him at present: presdt. and hon. life presdt.. Young Men's Vedte Society; life- presdt., Durban Indian Surf Life Saving Club ; presdt., Natal Indian [Farmers’ Assocn. ; life v.-presdt., Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, Durban and District Indian Football Assocn., Durban Indian Referees’ Assocn. ; hon, joint secty., S..\. Hindu Maha Sabha ; life trustee, Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn; life trustee and hon. secty., Durban District Indian Football Assocn, Trust; chairman, Tanjore Indian School Board, Umgeni; presdt., Umbtlo Hindu Temple, Riverside Indian Ratepayers’ Assocn. Durban North, Durban Higher Grade Indian School Old Boys’ Assocn.; patron, Hindu Youth Club; v.-patron, Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ and Girl Guides’ Assocn.; executive committee, Indo-European Council; member, Indian Technical Education Committee, Indian Social Service Committec. India Branch S.A. Youth Movement, Umgeni Road Hindu Temple Committee, Indian Hospital Advisory Board, Indian Sub-Committee of the Probation Assocn. of Natal, Indian School Children Relicf Committee. Held numerous other important official positions. Was a keen sportsman, playing football and cricket, was also bantam-weight boxer, Address - (Res.) 3], Riverside Rd., Umgenit, Durban North. (Bus.) Government Indian School, North Coast Rd., Umgeni, Durban, Natal, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 161 MORAR, Jekison Vithal; 6. Padkeshwar, dist. Surat; educ. Dun dee and private study. Isa bookkeeper by pro- fession, Public actri- fives: Weenly interested in all matters affecting the Incian community as well as sharing in public work. Is an official of several public hoclies. Rerveahion ¢ Tennis. dddress : P.O, Box 47, Ladysmith, Natal. NAIDOO, V. Sarkari, B.A.; educ. Marine College and private study ; Bachelor of Arts of the University of South Africa, Public activines : Auditor, Natal Indian Leachers’ Socicty, ete. Addre: Sastri College, Durban, Natal. NAIDOO, C. M.; &. South Coast Junct’n, July 24, 1906; 0 ede, lraitbreeze Govern- ment-Aided School, Tongaat and Carlisle Street Government School, Passed Indian Teachers’ Examination (Junior) 1928, (Senior) 1930, Appointed as assistant teacher at Jdarnall, 1928. Entered Government service 1930, being posted to Pinetown Government School teaching staff; transferred to Lady- smith, 1933. Public acharttes Jainly confined to sports. Secty., Central C.C., 19 secty., H.G.S.LC.C., 1926; Capt. Mayville Jumors 1°.C.; secty. and treas., Tongaat Indian Recreation Club, 1929-30; presdt. and capt., Junction C.C,, 1930-33 | v.-presdt., Moonlighters F.C.; presdt. and delegate of Datfodils Juvenile l.C. to KR LEAL, 1933; presdt., Hotel Employe’s C.C. (Seniors), 1933; presdt., Ladysmith Indian Workers’ Classes; hon. secty. and treas., NR.DILELAL, 1934 ; member, Selection Committee for Northern Natal for team to play All-India tounsts, 1934; K.R.D.I.F.A. delegate to Ladysmith D.l. Sports Assocn.; — representing Sports’ oen, T.C. on Northern Natal Tennis Union. -lddvess Government Indian School, P.O. Box 59, Ladysmith, Natal. Is NAIDOO, Srun- vasaloo Munsamy : 6. Umhlali, Natal, May 28, 1895; educ. St. Anthony's School, Durban ; #7, Govinda- mah Naidoo, treas., Tamil Women’s Assocn. On leaving school was in privateemployment; started the well-known Indian establishment of Peter’s Lounge, in 1920. which since 1926 has been situated in the present modern prem- ises at the corner of Grey and Pine Streets; proprictor of Peter's Lounge. Public activities : Takes a warm interest in all matters affecting the Indian community, Supports all progressive community movements, recently made a generous donation of three figures towards the Indian Club of Durban. address: (Res.) 34, Lorne St., Phone C. 1692, (Bus.) 125a, Grey St., Phone C. 3769, Durban, Natal. NAIDOO, Moonsamy Govindasamy, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., etc. (£din.), medical — practitioner, Durban; 6. Durban, 1902; edue. Carlisle Street Indian School, Durban, S.A.N.C., Fort Hare, and Edinburgh. — ddress :— (Res.) 2, Mallinson Ra., Sydenham, Phone Overport 5113. (Bus.1 199, Grey St., Phone C. 1108, Durban, Natal. NAIDOO, Vurdiah Govindswami; 2nd s. of Vurdiah Naidoo, 500, Loop Street, Mar- itzburg ; b. Maritzburg, March 16, 1891; edue. St. Paul’s School, Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School and private study ; m. Sinthamani, 2vd d. of VR. IXain, Maritzburg, 3s., 3d. Engaged in business since 1907, now managing the firm of Moosa Ayob, mer- chants, Dundee. Pub(ic activities; Secty. of the Reception Com- mittee formed to mcet the Rt. Hon. V. S. Sastri at Dundee; presdt. of the Dundee Indian Library and Social Club; presdt. of the King’s Jubilee Celebrations Indian Committee ; secty. and v.-presdt., Dundee Hindu Temple ; v.-presdt., H.Y.M.A., Dundee 3 was member of the Theosophical Society, Maritzburg ; acted as host to the various Agents and distinguished Indians visiting Dundee, Always takes a leading part in all work of the community. Hobbies : Gardening and reading. Address: (Res.) 27, Gladstone St. Dundee, Natal.

---

## Page 7

162 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO O, Soobrayaloo Ramachandra; 0. s. of Nae Naidoo; 6. Port Elizabeth, Sept. I, 1903 ; educ. Port Elizabeth ; we. at Queenstown, Anjathamall (b. Queenstown), 3rd d. of S. Dorasamy Naidoo formerly of Thilyadi, Mayavarum, S. India. Had been engaged in business, general and other, now retired. _ Public work : Presdt., Eastern Province Indian Football ‘Assocn., 1934, one of those largely responsible for the reception to the All-lndia Soccer tourists to Port Elizabeth ; patron of the Dradnots LF.C. ; veprsdt, Cape Indian Congress (Port Elizabeth branch) ; vi-presdt., Siva Soobramania Alayam. Prominently connected with all public affairs. Address : P.O. Lox 353, 68, Walmer Rd., Port Elizabeth, C.P. NAIDOO, Moon- swami Runganathan; c. s. of M. M. Naidoo, of Pietermaritzburg 5 8. Pietermaritzburg, Mar. 1, 1906; educ, York Road Government In- dian School, On leaving school accepted em- ployment in the motor traile. In 1927 started own business with marked success as dealer in) mechanical goods, particularly motor and cycle trade. Public activities : Committec member: Solonial-Born anc . ; Scutlers Indian Assocn. ; lite v.-presdt., Pietermaritz- burg Indian Lawn Tennis Assocn. ; secty., Pieter- maritzburg District Indian Cycling Club; patron, Young Colonials F.C. ; holds a number of other official positions. Travelled extensively throughout tho country. Hobby : Motoring, flying and shooting. “dddress + ATia, Church St., Phone 4029, Picter- maritzburg, Natal. NAIK, Nathoobhai Makenji; see page 410 for biography. +o NATHOO, Vithal Morar ; Commissioner for Oaths for the district of Dundee, Natal, 1935. For further veference see page 173. PARMANAND, Na- haur Dookhie ; bo. Maritzburg, [894: edit. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, and In- dian High School, P.M.Burg. Entered Civil Service, 1916, be- ing appointed clerk and Indian interpreter at Balwer, transferred to P.M.Burg in 1920: promoted to Durban, 1922 as interpreter to the Principal Immigra tion Officer, Natal. Public activitics 2 One of the leaders in P.M.B. the Indian. strike, ; are was arrested and released on £1,000 bail. ‘Miso took prominent part in other public activities ; secty., Veda Dharma Sabha, 1922. Tn Sport : Was capt. of the Higher Grade School E,, 1922, and one of its foundation members. Repstd. Maritzburg and Durban in intertown soccer and cricket ; was secty., N.LE.A. and N.LC.U, Address : (Res.) 33, Barry Grove, Sea View. (Bus.) Immigration Dept., Point, Durban, Natal. PARUK, Goolam Hoosen Ebrahim, familiarly known as "“Baboo’’; 6. Kathor, ndia, 1911; edue. Carlisle Strect Govern- ment Indian School, Jurban, and private study; 3rd s, of E. C. Paruk, merchant, nephew of E. M. Paruk; m. ouly @. of E. MM. Paruk. On leaving school engaged in father’s business, start- ing own business of general dealer at 131- 1$la, Grey Street, Dur- ban, 1935; prop. ot ., ; Baboo's Store. Puble actiuitivs : Keenly interested in all matters affecting the Indian community; a committee member of the Orient Club, and captain of all sporting activities of the Club; was a keen soccer and cricket player. Now a tennis enthusiast, a playing member and ofheral of the Moonlighters fenms Club, formed in 1926, -fddres (Res.) 105, Marriott Rd. (Bus.) 131-13la, Grey St.. Phone C. 474, Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 163 PATEL, Dhanabhai Kanjeebhai ; 6. Kach- hiawadi, Navasari, dist. Barada State, 1887; educ, Kachhiawadi an‘ Navasari. Came to South Africa at an early date, settled in Durban. Started busi- ness as a general dlealcr at Durban tn 1910, being one of the early traders. Vormerly en- gaged in various branches of commer- cial activities, including box manufacturing. At present is a fruit exporter and produce dealer, trading in the firm name of D. Kk. Patel. Public activities : Secty.. Surat Hindu Assocn.; member, Surat Educational Society ; member, Natal Indian Congress; member of the Bombay Presidency Assocn. A staunch worker in the cause of the Indian community ; foundation member of Hindu Maha Sabha, .fddress Hargovan Building, 19, Cross St., Phone C. 327. Tel. Add. : “Letapeo,”” Durban, Natal. PATEL, Bhailal Mathoorbhai; Commissioner for Oaths for the district of Durban, Natal, 1935. 9 For further reference sce page 178. PATEL, Jhaverbai ; wile of Bhailal Mat- hoorbhai Patel, Com- missioner for Oaths fcr the District of Durban, ec d@. of Motibhai Ish- warbhai Patel of Nadiad; &. Nadiad, dist, Weria, Vikram Samvat 1952 in the month Ashad, Sudi Dasham (July. 1896) : educ. Nadiad ©». April 30, 1910: 2s. Javanti- lal and Natverlal. Came to South Africa in 1917. Public activi- ties: Ardent worker in the cause of social reform in her community and for an elevated status for women in the Indian community ; member of the first Indian Women’s Assocn. formed in Durban, of which she was the v.-presdt. ; founded the Gujarati Hindu Mahila Mundal, Durban, Nov. 2, 1930, being its presdt., member of the Indian Child) Welfare : member of the Durban Indian Women’s Assocn. Hobby - Motoring (only Gujarati Hindu lady to have a motor driver's licence in South Africa), Address : 156, Victoria St., Phone C. 1988, Durban, Natal. PEMA, Lalla; sec ‘‘Prema Lalla,’’ classifica section, PATHER, Singara- valoo Ruthnum, Barrister-at-Law 5 Vv. 8. of late S, Singaravaloo Pather ; 6b. Durban, \pril, 1889: etc, Durban and f.ondon : qualified for the Bar at Lincoln's Inn, 1912. Practising as solicitor in Durban; ow. Srd d. of late VV. Moorgas Pillay, of Grevtown, Public activities : Commenced from voung davs—-one of the founders of the H.Y.M.\., 1905, which is now the Young Men's Vedie Society. of which he is v.-presdt, in 1909 founded the Durban Indian Society : 1912 member of the old N.C. and fought against the virtual exclusion of colonial-borns as members. As a result of the dispute between Gandhi and the then Congress on q icstion of m*mbership, took a leading part with others, mn starting the N.J, Assocn. ; owing to the differences in the community the N.I.A. becoming practically defunct, helped in founding the present N.LC, Resigned when Class Areas Bill was introduced. took leading part in the agitation against it, inter- viewed Ministers, held protest meetings all over the country and enlisted the co-operation of the peuple, Press and Government of India. Also identified, as one of the secretaries, with the work of the S.A.1, Federation; gave evidence before a number of commissions ; organised various local committecs to acopt measures against the hardslops caused by the Public Health Committees. which were brought mto existence in 1924 and challenged successfully the legality of the constitutions of such boards in Court, despite com- paratively unanimous adverse legal opinion. Thanked by Union Government for organising relief work during several epidemics. Associated with the religious work of the South Coast Junction Temple, being first Hindu Temple built in South Africa, a gift of his father. Co y. of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha, since ity inception, 1912, and one of the secretarics of the three conferences ; conimittec member of the old Natal Colonial-Born Assocn. member of the Mayor's Flooct Relicf Committee, 1917- 18 :secty. of the Central Indian llood Retief Committee, 1935. far London : In 1906-1909 member of the Committee of London Indian Society, which was founded by the late Dadabhai Naoroji, took a Jeading part i all student activities : establishing the London Indian Majlis, organised the London meeting pro- testing against the treatment of Indians in South Africa in 1907. LS port: Helped in the organisation of sporting bodics—-Natal [nctian Lawn Tennis Assoen. and the re-organisation of the South Coast District Indian E.A. which is only sports assocn. to acquire freehold yrounds, duc to his endeavours. Was presdt., N.P.1. IVA. Has been associated with practically all public movements, Publications ¢ Edited Dhrama Vir (now defunct) and Jrdian Views for many years. Address : (Res.) 156, South Coast Rd., South Coast Junction, P.O. Rossbhurgh. (Bus.) 38, Cathedral Rd., Durhan, Natal.

---

## Page 8

164 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO NULLIAH, Naidoo Charlie; 6. Umgeni, Durban, 1861, Is be- lieved to be among the first colonial-borns. Lived in) Umgeni and district until the age of 15, then came to Maritzburg where he has resided since. Was engaged in general dealer's business, agri- cultural and sugar farming. Now. brick manufacturer. Holds Government contract for bricks. large em- ployer of labour, Public activites A pionecr im public work, took prominent part in all matters affecting the community, names in the Province. welcome the Hon. G. W School, now York Road. ereatly interested in the of the best known s presdt., now v.-presdf., of the N.LC. (P.M.Burg branch): was trustec of the Hindu ‘Temple. Heid many leading eflicial positions. including chairman of the reception committee to Gokhale m= 1912, Accom- panied a number of deputations to Government on Indian grievances. Was an carly worker in the cause of education, Has been activities of the Wigher Grade Patron of the Veda Dhrama Sabha. {fp Sport: Was once a owner and member of the City Sporting Chib and thie Durban Turf Club, being the only Indian member, owner of many winning horses, including the Coronation Handicap, 19035, winner ‘ Mealies. se intertown trophy to Indian football; life v.-presdt. Government Indian prominen t race-horse Presented junior of the M.D.EPLA. Was an exhibitor for 28 years at the Royal Agricultura prizes, ~ Of a charitable securing many first hospitable character. formerly contributed large amounts to the Barnardo Home in England, In the Boer War was on active service as a member of the Home Guard. Address ~ (Res.) 13, Greytown Kd ., Phone 2402. (Bus.) Brook- side Brick & Tile Yards, Phone 2387, Greytown Kd Maritzburg. In Durban’ Mayville. PATEL, Naranbhai Madhavbhai ; sec page 110 for biography. Brick Yards, Randles Rd PADAYACHEE, Ramakrishna Veer- apen Marday ; b, Port Louis, Mauritius, Oct. 7. 1875 edue Port Louis. | Arrived m Durban, Natal, May 31, 1896, by the "Har- fest Castle After oa short stay in) Durban proceeded to Johannes- burg, where worked as a clerk. At the out- break of the Boor Wer came bick to Natal, staved in) Maritzburg for two rs. when started farming Later removed to News Ger- : mony where engaged in business as truitercr and farmer, In 1913 came back to Mariteburg, openny tobaccosist anc gencral cenler’s business, in whicl. he is still envaged. Is also a property owner, Prblic echuties. V.-presdt, of the Mauntius Hindu Friendly Socicts estd. in 189%, which was one of the first Flindu secieties in the Transvaal. Was secty. of the Vaniy Nufa Ishvatrie Sabha, 1907-15. when a commencement of the Hindu Templ: building was made: from 1915 to date, its preside it In 1999 erected at his own eanpense addittonal buildings at Yemple. Address 508, Church St Pieter: maritaburg., Natal. PILLAY, Vythlingam Kristnasamy soo. ¢. 9. should read married cldest daughter of RR. N, Moodley. Biography appears on page 428, PILLAY, Muthu- samy Nadesia: b, Porayar, dist, Tanjore : Madras, I8G7 20 edite Porayar, Came te South Africa m 1896 settled in Durban. few vears afterwards went to Johannesburg. During the Boor War returned to Durban, where he took up per- manent residence, Started business as cigar Manutacturcr, was a partner ‘in the Imperia! Cigar Manu- tacturing Ca. Kesigned and started on his own’ . now jaint prop. of the Standard Cigar Co., Durban. Public acivitiees Was chairman, now trustee, of the S. V. Temple, Umgem Road, Durban; a keen supporter of vernacular education and of Hindu social reforms. -ddress : (Kes.) 73, Fountain Lane (Bus.) 73, Carlisle St., Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 165 PILLAY, Mooroogasan (also known as M.S. David); 3rd s. of late Singaravelloo Pillay; 6. Port Louis, Mauritius, Aug. 6,1883, educ. Government School, Port Louis and Holy Cross School, Port Elizabeth. Arrived in Port Elizabeth in 1894, after a period of schooling went back to Mauritius. Returned in 1902 and then went to Wimberley, after a short stay returned to Port Elizabeth, where was in private employment for 14 years. In 1914 started own business as general dealer, which he is conducting up to the present time. Public achvitres : Former secty. of the Mauritius Colonial-Born Hindu Benefit Society. An ardent worker for the cause of Tamil education, in 1908 started vernacular school under the auspices of the Society. In 1920 founded the Vinayaga I:ducational Institute, which he had been maintaining at his own expense. A keen reader of vernacular literature, having a large library of well- known ‘Tamil works. A generous donor to all educational and other appeals. ddyess : Commercial Rd, Sidwell, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. PILLAY, Para- surama; 6 North Arcot, 1877; came to South Africa in 1907, settled ar Umkomaas. In 1923 took up per- manent residence in Port Shepstone, where engaged ta farming, being one of the largest growers of tobacco among Indians in the clistrict, also occupied on large scale with other branches of farming. Public activities ¢ Chair- man Hindu Education 4 Society; rendered valu- 1 able services in the , cause of Indian education ; keenly interested in ail public affairs. Address : (Res.) Albertsville. (Bus.) P.O, Box 13, Phone 50, Port Shepstone, Natal. PHILIP, Appasamy Kistasamy: 6. Dur- ban, 1889; edec. Durban, Started the Crown Steam Laundry in 1917, of which he is the proprictor. Is a large employer of In- dian labour. Public activities : Committee member of the Gandhi Sentimal Government. Aided School, Durban. Takes an interest in the progress of the Indian community. Presdt. of the Spes Bona Yennis Club. Holds other official positions. Address - 96, Canada Rd., Phone C, 2406, Durban, Natal. PILLAY, Krishna S-my,; 4. Trangabar, Madras, 1880; educ. Trangabar. Came toSouth Africa in 1891, settled in Port Elizabeth, where he started business. After ten years’ residence, transferred his interests to Uitenhage, where he has been trading ever since. Is a large property owner in both Part Elizabeth and Uitenhage. Was one of the pioneer Indians to settle in the Uitenhage district. Public activities: Has been vice-chairman, Cape British Indian Council (Uitenhage Branch) one of the foundation members of the Siva Soobramonicr Ayalam: presdt., Saraswati Educational Institute. .lddress; 245, Caledon St., Citenhage, Cape Province. RAMCHARAN, Budree, merchant: b, Maritzburg.. August, 903 > ¢. s. of Budree Nohar Shah - vdite York Road Govern- ment School and Pri- vate High School, P.M. Burg; oa. d. of R, Ramasar, Umainto. On leaving school en- tered business in 1920. Public activilres : Patron, Naw Yuvuk Pracharnee Sabha: secty., Veda Dharma Sabha ; was secty., Vedyva Pracharnee Sabha, 1928-29 ; treas., 1924-27; secty., South African Vedic Conference. P.M. Burg., 1928; acted as secty to several visiting misstonarics from India. /# Sport: Career dates from 1921; v.-presdt.. M.D.I.FLA. > secty and treas., N.LC.U., 19 secty. and treas.. M.1. Referees’ Assoen,, 1933-35; councillor, NJIC.U. and M.LS.A. : presdt., Pirates F.C., 1933-35; secty., six years - secty., Pirates C.C. 2 years and of M.ILC.C. six years. Prominently connected with other public activities, tddvess AGO, Grevling St., Phone 8673, Picter- maritzburg, Natal. REGNATH, Rambaran; ». Durban, Dec. 26, 1906 ; ¢.s. of J. Rambaran ; edue. St. Aidan’s College and Carlisle Street Secondary School and private study. Passed Senior Indian Teachers’ Examination Certi- ficate. A member of the teaching staff of the Cato Manor School. Keenly interested in the activities of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, of which he has been the secretary (twice) and assistant secretary, (twice) ; vpresident., N.LT.S. Public activities : Presdt., Durban Indian~Schools’ Football Assoen, ; one of those responsible for the Transvaal tour of 1932; secty., Natal Lawn Tennis Assocn.; presdt., Moontighters’ ‘Tennis Club; a member of the NvI.F.A, Council; official of the Teachers’ Scout Movement. Hobby : sport. dddress : 29, Garbatt Rd., Sydenham, Durban, Natal,

---

## Page 9

166 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO RASSOOL, Sayed Ahmed F.B.I. (London) ; Kadree, Chisti, Bokhare and a direct descendent of the Prophet Mukam- med: originally the family migrated to india from Bokhara (Russia) in the 17th century as missionarizs; b, Rander, dist. Surat, 1896 ; educ. Pieter- maritzburg and Bom- bay, holds a London Fellewship Diploma in bookkeeping and = ac- courtancy. After hold- ing important positions with several leading Indian firms, commenced own business with brother, Sayed Ajam, at Ladysmith in 1920, fn 1916 offered post at Poona and also at Singapore, but declined for the purpose of recruiting men in Surat for the Imperial Army. Occupied several public positions, including treas. of the N.LC. (Ladysmith) ; secty to several reception committees. In 1928/29 was back in India to joi the Swaraj movement but was averse to the policy of mon- co-operation. Acted as a peace-maker in the Hindu- Muslim mots in Surat, 1929. Visited Punjab, Afghanistan and Gujarat. Ardent advecate of Hindu- Muslim unity. The family is closcly connected with the Imperial Raj and received lands from the famous Emperor Akbar the Great and the Sufi Emperor Aurangzeb as “ Jageers."" Is a keen student of theology. pohtics and commerce. Sccty. to the Muslim Trust and secty. to Muslim Education Advisory Board, Ladysmith. Address - 68/70, Albert St., P.O. Box 27, Phone 127. Ladysmith, Natal. SEETHAL, William Silas; 6. Natal; educ. Durban. Principal of St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, Sydenham, Durban. Pubhe activities; ‘Treas., Natal Indian ‘Teachers’ Society. Hobby . A specialist in life insurance. fddress : St. Aidan’'s Boys’ School, Sydenham, Durban, Natal. SINGH, L.L.J.; & Durban. Served Ist S.A.1.B.G, in East Africa. Awarded Distinguished Service Medal, 1917. 5 aiaatinall SAMUEL, Veerasamy Chinasamy ; 34. Maritz- burg, 1898, only s, of late M. Veerasamy ; educ. Picter- maritzburg. On leaving schoo} joined the business of his father, being with him for JO years. In 1920 started on his own, sole proprietor of the Imperial Laundry, Public activities: v.-presdt., Sydenham F.C.; foundation member Maritzburg Indian Lawn Tennis Assocn.; v.-presdt., Pentrich Protective Tamil School. Visited India 1907, Portuguese Las Africa J930, and travelled in many parts of South Africa) Keen on sport, especially tennis. Address: 35 Chureh St., Phone 2733, Mantzburg, Natal. SHAM, Sewshanker; J. Verulam, Oct. 17, 1896: 4th s. of late Sham Sidar: cde. Verulam and private study, taking professional qualification — Indian Teachers’ Senior Certificate. Jomed the teaching profession in 1913, being appointed as assistant at the Verulam School, promoted headmaster of the Umbhloti School, 1920. A kecn sportsman, repstd. Durban and North Coast in inter-dlistrict cricket on several occasions. Toured India as a member of the first South African Indian Sporting contingent. Life vepresdt., N.C ALFA; presdt., Verulam TC. 5 council member, Natal Indian Lawn Tenni ssocn. ; former council member, Natal Indian achers Society. Hobbies : Sports and farming. Address ¢ P.O, Verulam, Natal. SINGH, Padam Bharat; /. Pieter- maritzburg ; edirc. Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School, Maritazburg ; am. d. af C. Hardew Singh, of Plessislacr. On leaving school was in private employment. Settled tn India for a while, was connected with the Government Audit Dept. at Karachi. Re- turned to South Africa in 1927, worked at Edendale, Since 1932 in Durban, where started business of Singh's Cafe. Pubic activities A prominent com- mittee member of South African Colonial-Born and Settlers’ Indian Assocn., on whose behalf investigated the conditions of Indian repatriates in India in 1934. in Sport : On behalf of the S.A.L.F.A., negotiated the tour of the All-India Soccer Team with the Calcutta Assocn. ; was one of the umpires of the M.C.C. agains) Karachi at Karachi; was an official of the N.P.LF.A. now amalgamated with the N.LE.A. Holds many other positions in sport and publ fife of the conm- munity. Accompanied the Baroda Girl Guides through- out their tour of the Union and Rhodesia, Address > (Res.) 477, Currie Rd. -(Bus.) 198, Grey St.. Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 167 SINGH, George, B.A.; 4. Durban. oo. 6. of 3S. Singh ; educ. Carlisle Street Government Indian Schvol and South African Native College, Fort Hare. Matriculated Class I. (Durban), passing B.A, of the University of South Africa at Fort Hare. Holds University diploma in Education. Teacher at Sastri College. Public activities Assistant sectv., Natal Indian Teachers’ Society. Captained South Africa against All-India Touring Team, 1934. Recreations : Football and tennis address : Sastri College, Durban, Natal. SINGH, Gokul Rambuli; 4. [nanda District, about 1880 ; educ. Durban. Was formerly a photo- grapher by profession and for many years a legal clerk now has relired. Public a Rvi- fies ; Since retirement devotes all his time to public work; ts an honorary teacher at Pentrich ane Maritz- burg Hindi schools. Was presdt., secty., Shree Vishnu Temple ; was presdt., treas., now v.-presdt., Veda Dhrama Sabha: presdt., Vedic Vidya Parceharak Sabha ; is also a trustee of all three tnstitutions; was a keen sportsman, plaved cricket and football, repstd P.M.B. as well as Natal in intertown matches: captained several of the intertown teams. A member of the first Natal football and cricket teams to play in the Transvaal; was capt, of the Royals F.C. for many vears and played cricket for M.f.C.C., one of the best individual teams in the country and during the 1903 tour to the Transvaal had never lost a match, Before becoming a photographer was a teacher at St. Paul's School, P.M.B. Address - 424, Topham Ra., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SINGH, T. R. K. (Thaj Ram Kaliyan), photographer: 3rd». of Kaliyan Singh, far- mer, of Ladysmith, formerly of O.F.S.; 6. Bethlehem, O. , Nov. 11, 1906; edie. Dutch Reformed Church Schoot (Euro- pean) Bethlehem Served apprenticeship m photography with Alen Bros, Bethicher, and I, Atkinson, Lady- smith. Commenced business in the O.F.S,, 1920-23 being then the only [ndian licensed Photographer in the Free State; for the following 7 years worked as a photographer in all parts of the Union. Since 1930 conducts own business as photo- grapher in Maritzburg; prop. of Singh's Studio. Public actiwihes Was one ot the founders of the school, which is now Government-Aided, at Putnie Spruit, dist. Klip River; was patron of the Ladysmith Schools’ F.C.; patron of Royals F.C., Maritzburg; member of the Veda Dhrama Sabha, Maritzburg. In trying to save three children from a dynamite explosion in the O.F.S, in 1917 lost left arm. Hobby - Conjurer and illusionist. Address ; (Bus.) 153, Retief St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SOOKDEO, Alghoo; 6. Durban, April 10, 1886; edue. Higher Grade Government In- dian School ; nm. twice, late Sookiah, d. of B. Rambhroas, Edendale, Natal and late FPauny Ethel, d. of David Ernest, Johannesburg; 4 daughters. Occupa- tion: clerk. = Public achyilies = Prominent member, Natal Indian Congress and attended all sessions of the S.A.LC. Conference ; member of the several welfare bodies. Has held practically every official position in both Natal and South African sport. Presdt., D.D.LTLA., 1928-31, and NTI. » 1982-33, secty., D.D.1. » 1926; record clerk, D.D.LL.\. for many years. Was one of those instrumental in forming the Sunday Soccer Assoc., then composed of Mayville and South Coast Junction, afterwards advocating its amalgamation with the N.LILA., a step which was consummated during his presidency of the N.I.F.A.; another step taken during his period of office was the creation of the Northern Districts Indian F.A. Presented the Sookdeo Shield for competition to the D.D.1.L.A. (Sunday League}. Repstd. D.D.I.F.A. on the N.LE.A. Council for many years; moved motion of invitation to the India team to tour South Africa, and was responsible for a good deal of the preliminary publicity work connected with it. Secty. and Treas., S.A.LPLA, 1926-27, was responsible for its re-organisation on a proper working basis to mect the new conditions of expansion. Connected with cricket administration for the last 28 years. Presdt., N.L.C.U., 1932-33; presdt., D.LC.U., v.-presdt., D.L-C.U., 1934-35. Presdt. Durban Indian Golf Club, 1932, v.-presdt., 1933-35. Presdt., Durban Indian Anglers’ Assocn, Secty. of the Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn., 1925-6-7; at present one of ity trustees. Address; (Res.) 47, Keal Rd., Sydenham. (Bus.) City Cle-x's Office, City Half, Durban.

---

## Page 10

168 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO TANDREE, Tommy ; shipping agent. &. Durban. Was in business as shipping agent in Durban for many vears. Is now engaged in business in East Africa wtddress > P.O. Box 135, Mombasa WKenva, East Africa. TIRY, Sheik Allie ; 4h, Mahad, dest Kalaba ; educ, Mahadand Viten- hage. Settled in Vitenhage. Started business in the meat trade, proprietor of Cosmopolitan Butchery. Public activities : Committee member of the Cape British Indian Council. Has taken a prominent part in all matters affecting the Indian community, Is a liberal donor to all deserving movements. Travelled extensively both in India and the Union, Address : 3, Caledon St., Phone 161 Tel. Address: “Tiry,”’ Uitenhage. Cape Province. +. VARIAWA, Goolam Hoosen Suliman; b. Boodhan, dist, Surat, 1903; educ. Boodhan and Government Indian School Johannesburg. First in private employment in Johannesburg, in 1921 moved to Lichtenberg, where commenced business in partner- ship in the firm name of C Dawood & Co, Later started own business at Klancdsputte diamond diggings, again went back to Lichtenburg, where opened general dealer's store in the name of G. Hassen & Co. In 1934 started wholesale business in Johannesburg. Captained the Oriental Muslim C.C. and F.C, at Lichtenburg. Address : (Res.) 74, Crown Rd., Fordsburg. (Bus.) 72, Bree St, Johannesburg, Transvaal. VAWDA, G. M. A. merchant; 2. New- castle, Natal, 1902; educ St. Oswald's School, Newcastle. After a period of pri- vate employvinent started own business of general dealer at Neweastle. Public ac- finities > Presdt., C.B. and S.I,4. (Newcastle Branch); presdt., N.1. Angling Club, 1934 ancl 35; presdt.. N.I. Rate- payers’ and Burgesses’ Assocn, ; repstd. New- castle at the S.A.LC. Conference, Capetown, ‘ 1925; repstd. Newcastle C.B. and S.L4., Durban life v.-presdt.. N.D.LIA. and one of its founders. donor of the Vawda Floating Trophy ; patron, MYA. 1935: chairman, Reception Committec to Baroda Girl Guides, 1935; presdt., Stella Indian F.C, ; presdt., St. Oswald School's O. v.-presdt., NI. Tennis League; v.-presdt., N.I.FLA.; v.-presdt.. Tahidial Anjuman Islam: signatory as treas. on address to H.R.H. Prince of Wales, H.E. the Governor- General, etc. Holds many other offices. Is an energetic member of the Indian community, social worker and a philanthropist. Hebbv : Sport and public work. Address P.O, Box 98, Phone 93, Newcastle, Natal. VAWDA, Ismail S., merchant; 0. New- castle; edie. Newcastle and Durban, On leav- ing school joined father’s business. On father's death became joint owner with brother, of the firm, trading as S. EF. Vawda. Public aétivilies : Takes a leading part in all public affairs of the district of New- castle; presdt., N.LC. (Newcastle Branch) ; repstd. Natal at many sessions of the S.A.LC. Conferences ; chairman of the Newcastle Muslim Community, due in no small measure to his efforts that this organisation possesses a large block of buildings. Has contributed a generous amount to the building fund of the Sastri College. Holds many other offictal positions on public bodies. viddress : P.O. Box 6, Phone 44, 33a, Allen St., Newcastle, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 169 INDIAN WHO WAS WHO “Tell It to the Generation Following” AYOB, Noor Mahomed. whose biography appears on page 37, died at Pretoria on August 7. 1935 BAYAT, Amod; b. Varacha., about 1859; dicd at Pietermaritz- burg, 1931. On leaving india went to Mauri- tius where he resided for about ten years. Proceeding to Natal, here was in private employment, then started own business in Maritzburg; was con- nected with it prac- tically until the time of his death. Pahere activities : Was a keen public worker from the very early days. Took a prominent part in the life of the community: a fonndation member of the N.EC., a member of the deputation to England in 1909, to protest against the then licensing law of 1896; the result was the amendment which gave the right to appeal in the case of renewals against the decision of the licensing ofheer to the Supreme Court ; was a member of the South Afnean Indian deputation to India im connection with the Class Areas Bill was a founder of the Surat Suni Mosque and Madressa, POM.Burg. Was highly respected by all sections of the community, for his great aualities of honesty, gencrosity and hospitality. BAYAT, Ismail Ebe rahim; U. Surat, India, 1871; died, Durban, Mav 1, 1932. First landed Durban, 1886. Proceeded to the Trans- vaal; after a short stay, returned to Natal, entering business with his cousin, Dawood Ma- homed Bayat, at Dun- dee, 1890. Transferred interests to Maritzburg, entered into partner- ship in the firm of his brother, Amod Bayat, 47, Church St., opened branch in Durban, 1917. Public work : Presdt. and a trustee of the Mohamecan Mosque and Madressa, Maritzburg, up to the time of his death: one of the founders of the Mohamedan Oriental School, for which he collected funds, adding a hostel and was responsible for bringing out teachers from India, 1918; secty., Madressa Anjuman Islam, and West St. Mohamedan Mosque, Durban, up to the time of his death ; secty., Mota Varachha Trust Fund, Natal Branch; was chairman, Natal Indian Merchants’ Assocn, — Is survived by a widow and two sons, BHABHA, Amod Essop; 6. Kxholvad, dist,, Surat, [865 ; died, July 10, 1933. Came to South Africa in 1888, being one of the pioncer Indian merchants.Settled in Middleburg, where he conducted general dealer's business for 35 years, Was one of the leading Indians in district, being respected by alk sections of the community. On_ his death, the .Jiddleburg Observer wrote: “If Mr, Bhabha had any faults—if one can call it a fault—it was his extreme generosity. He was highly respected by all the old Middleburgers who knew him. No call for charity or for the promotion of the Lown was ever turned down by the late A. E. Bhabha.” He was one of advanced outlook and devoted ail his spare time to the study of English literature, politics, economics and religious subjects. He communicated his interest in these subjects to his children. While a devoted Muslim, he was a good indian and his acts of generosity and benevolence touched all sections of the community. He took part in the passive resistance movement under Mr. Gandhi, serving a term of imprisonment. The water supply of Mr, Bhabha's native town, Kholvad, in the Surat district, is derived from the ground given in charity by him, CASSIM, Suliman; 4. Bhanavad, died May 30, 1930; ¢. Moosd Cassim (who is in charge of the Zout- pansberg ‘Timber Store, Box 6, Louis Trichardt) and Mahomed Cassim. Was the first business man in Louis Trichardt, Prior to this stayed in Pietersburg for short time, then started own business, developing rt on considerable scale, acquiring large property interests. He was premier Indian of the district. Donated an ert of land to the mosque, of which his widow is trustee. His death wa» mourned by all sections of the community. Widow and sons now run the business interests.

---

## Page 11

170 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO _ CHINA, Sam; ?. Pondicherry, French India, 1857; died Sept. 9. 1930, Landed at Durban by the ship Earl of Hardinth, Sept. 21. 1863. Was em- ployed near Durban for 10 vears, In 1872 left with five others fer Kimberley during the diamond rush, completing the journcy on foot in 21 days, after suffering great privation, Was in pri vate employment, and in 1881 left to com- mence business, trad- ing as a retail and wholesale merchant. He was well known to all af the pioneers of Wimberley, including Cect! John Rhodes. Public activities ; Was keenly interested in all the activities connected with the welfare of the Indian community. Was a keen sports- man, presenting the trophy, which bears his name, for South African Indian football. He died at IWim- berlcy in 1930, at a period when Union footballers were present to compete for his trophy, the captains of each competing centre acting as pall-bearers. He is survived by three daughters, Mrs. RK. S_ Pillay, Mrs. N. Veerasamy and Mrs. 5. N. Moodley. CHOONOO, John; 4 in Gaya, India and when guite young went to Mauritius, where for several years served as a catechist under the Church Missionary Society. He married in Mauritius and there his wife predeceased him. leaving 4 children. He marri.d again and left for Natal in Sent- ember, 1880, [n 1882 he began his mission- ary career under the Wesleyan Methodist Church of South Africa which he served far 42 years without a break. His activitics extended on the coast belt of Natal, where he helped to build a number of churches and Indian schools. ‘fwo of his sons, Reuben and Arthur, are Methodist ministers, and three others, Timothy, Ezekiel and Walter, are head teachers of Government-Aided schools at Verulam, ‘Tongaat and Prospect-Hall respectively. He died at the age of 95 years on Easter Sunday, April 20, 1924. His wife died 8 months later on July 27, 1924. DEENDAR, Hajee Mahomed Hajee Amod; & WKholvad, 1865; 9 died, May, 1926.) Left India, proceeding to Mauritius in 1884, where he was in private cmployment. From Mauritius came to South Africa in Jan.. I888, being among early Indian arrivals. Stayed first in Johannesburg, later in Pretoria: opened business in partnership at Pietersburg. After- wards joined M. A. Deendar and A. M. Bhayat at Pietersburg, trading in firm name of The Durban House. In 1897 dissolvect partnership and started own business at Maritstad. Returned to India. coming back in 1904; opencd tusi-ess at Krugersdorp in the same year. In 1905 went to E melo and started business there, which Fe developed into one of the cading businesses in this area, His family then joined nim in Ermelo. He was presdt. of the Ermelo Molaammedan community and always took a prominent part in atl public work, In 190] made p-lgrimage to Mecca. In India was a committee memLer of the Shotvad water works and Antuman Islam. Retu ned to India in 1923 ard lived till 1926. In inte.im did useful public work at Wholvad. Was cf a chanitatle disposition, aiding all appeals to charitable movements, No deserving appeal was ever ignored by lum. Was a large donor to the hospital and waterworks at Xholvad. Is survived by three sons (Ismail Mahomed Deendar, Essop Mahomed Deendar and Suleman Mahomed Deendar) and four daughters. CACHALIA, Ahmed Mahomed : chairman of the Transvaal Brilish Indian Assocn , one of the staunchest Passive Resistance leaders. He served periods of imprison- ment and allowed him- self to be made insol- vent rather than violate his oath. sub- sequently paying his creditors in full, DAWOOD, Ma- homed, merchant and leader. One of the out- standing leaders of the Indian community. Died in Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 17] EBRAHIM, Ma- homed (of the firm of M. Ebrahim Soondka, Ltd}; 5, Ranavay, 1882; educ. Ranavay. Came to South Africa in 1912, setthng in Pretoria. First) was partner in brother’s business in name of N. M. Ebrahim, buat resigned in order to start own business under name of M. Ebrahim Soondka, wholesale merchants and direct importers. A quiet worker in the cause of the community. Died in India, 1934 MAHARAJ, Boboolal; o. x, of late Hamraj Maharaj ; 6. Port Eliza- beth, June 17, 1884; died in Pretoria, 1935. m. Rajawanthi 3rd d. of Ramphall, of Pre- toria. Was in bust- ness; Indian interpreter of the magistrate and Supreme Courts; pro- perty owner, Public activities» V.-presdt., T.LC. (Pretoria Branch) and represented Trans- vaal at various sessions of the S.A.L.C. Confer- ence, including the first conference. Treas. of the Transvaal Indian Defence Assocn.: v.-presdt., Transvaal British Indian Assocn., which has now merged into the Congress. ook part in Passive Resistance struggle in 1909, suffering a term of three months’ imprisonment. epresdt., Hindu Seva Samaj; committee member of the Pretoria Indian Hospital Committce ; chairman of the Pretoria Devi Temple ; as one of the leading Indians presented to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales ; chairman of the Hindu Assocn. Had a South African reputation as one of the best Indian soccer players in the country ; played in the forward position; startecl in the year 1902. repstd. Transvaal on three occasions; v.-capt., 1913 and 1924; capt., 1926; played for years for Pretoria inter-district, captained the Pretorians I°.C. for many years, V.-capt. of the first South African soccer team to India, 1921-22. Presdt. twice P.D.ILF.A.; also life v.-presdt, and treas. for last 10 years. Was prominently connected with the tour of the All-India football team to the Union, 1934. Also played rugby since 1905, repstd. Pretoria in eleven inter-district matches, captained nine others, and on one occasion capt. of the Transvaal ; played for Standards ; captained the club for 16 years, was a life v.-presdt. An out- standing cricket player, repstd. Transvaal Colourds on three occasions, 1907-9-23,; repstd. Pretoria for many years, played from 1902 till “S4, Was alsa a fine swimmer, cyclist, boxer, and weight-lifter. Was one of the best known figures in South African sporting circles. KHAN, Rahim Karim; was Barrister- at-law, member of [.1n- coln’s Inn; member Supreme Court of Judi- cature, England; ad- vocate Supreme Court of Sauth Africa (N.P.D.) 5 &. Bombay, March 24, 1874: died Oct. 8, 1932. During Boer War acted as leader of Ambulanec Corps at Colenso and Spion Kop, etc., giving services free, for which he was thanked by Government and clecorated with the usual medal was for many years joint secty. of the Natal Indian Congress. Repstd. Natal at S.A.1C. Conferences 1 was appointed by Government of Natal as member of Board of Examiners for ludian languages. On his death left practically his whole estate. es- ceeding £40,000, fer Indian medical relief. MEHTA, Jaya- shanker Bhaichand: a nephew of Keva- shanker Jagjivan Javeri, Bombay and Dr. P. J. Mehta, Ran- goon ; 6. Morvi, Wathi- war, 1878; died, Dur- ban, Aug. 5, 1931. On leaving school was in the service of Dhuram- pur, one of the large Indian states. Soon after he accompanied Mahatma Gandhi to South Africa, arriving in Durban, Dec., 1896. Was a clerk in) Mr. Gandhi's office till 1900 and for a short time was with the late Parsee Kustomjee. He started own business in Grey Street, Durban. adjoining the present mosque, where he established a very successful and solid concern. He gave freely of what he had, £100 to the Sastri College Building Fund, and in his will left £1,250 for educational scholarships, £250 for a hospital at Durban, £150 for the erection of the Kathiwar Arva Mandal building and many other amounts to private and public charities. For his donations during the Great War, he was thanked by the then Mayor of Durban. He is survived by his widow and two sons, Shantilal and Chimanlal Mehta.

---

## Page 12

172 THE SOUTH AFRICAN IN DIAN WHO'S WHO MEER, Cassim Hajee Suleman; 0. Surat City, Oct. 12, 1884. Died at Dundee. May 30, 1930. Educ. Surat City. Came to South Africa in 1896, settled in Dunidec, where he was in busi- ness. He was the leadiny Indian in the district, prominently identifying himself with public work. Chairman of the Natal Indian Congress, Dun- dee Branch: presdt. of the Northern Natal Chamber of Commerce; : presdt. of the Muslim Congregation ; presdt. of the Dundee and District Indian Football Assocn, ; waa an atticial of practically all public bodies in Northern Natal; was a member of Congress deputation to the Minister of the Interior, Dr, D. F. Malan, in connection with the Class Areas Bill, 1924; repstd. Natal at the S.A.1.C. Conferences from 1919. Was also a large donor of the Sastri College Building Fund, was one of those responsibly for starting the indian School at Dundee. Was a strong acivocate of Muslim female education. In India repstd. Surat City at the All-India Muslim Educational Conference, elected as one of the members of the reception committce of 17; joint secty. of the reception committee of the \\-India National Congress held at Surat City ; was a large donor toward», and instrumental to a great extent in, the erection of the Surat Islam Yatimkhana; first chairman of its committee. Collected a large sum ot money for the Khalifat Fund, which was signally recognised by its committee, consisting of distinguished Muslims. He is survived by his widow and 1] children, the sons are Yousuf, Ebrahim, Mahomed and Suleman. NAIDOO, P. K.; #. Natal, eventually settled in the Trans- vaal. Took a promin- ent part in public activities, and was the secty. of the Transvaal {ndian British Assocn. Visited India to secure co-operation of the Government and people for the removal of Indian disabilities in South Africa. Was in Maritzburg in the Indian strike of 1913, being arrested and re- leased on £1,000 bail. Died in Johannesburg MOOSA, Hajee Is- mail Amod Haffejee; b. Tadkeshwar, Bom- bay, Feb. 6, 1890; «. x. of A. H. Moosa, mer- chant, Durban. Man- aged firm of A. H. Moosa till 1914, when took charge of the Bombay office; made himself very popular with commercial and public life of Bombay. Was made member of the Willingdon Club, the Islam Club and the Imperial Indian Citizenship Assocn., Bombay Toured Europe, 1921, on return brought back a Rolls Koyce, being first Indian owner. Formed Red Crescent Society, of which he was elected treas., helped in sending large sum of money to Turkey during the Balkan War. In Bombay his home was open to all South African visitors, entertaining $.A.1.C. deputation and Beyer’s Delegation. Was keen on starting large textile factory in Durban but, owing to the Government not being prepared to admit a certain number of workers from India, abandoned the project. Was largely responsible for the Indian Traders memorandum t> the Fazl-i Hussain Delegation, 1932. Keen on education, donated 10,000 rupees for scholarship to the Aligarh University and has provided com- mercial scholarships for South African Indian students at Bombay. .\ donor to the Sastri College Building Fund. One of the founders of the Orient Club, Durban. A man with progressive views and an ardent worker for the uplift of the community. Treas. of the Indo-European Joint Council for several years. On his return, after having completed his pilgrimage, died at Jedda, Arabia, April 17, 1934, NAIDOO, Thumbi ; b. Mauritius : died Johannesburg. 1934. On arrival in South \fiica stave in) the Cape. eventually moved to the Trans- vaal: was the first Tamilian to start busi- ness in Johannesburg. Ao staunch public worker from his ar- nval to the time of his death. Suffered many (about twelve} terms of imprisonment, in both the Passive Resistance movements of 1907 and 1913. Was an presdt. of the T.1.B.A. and the ‘TLC. and was con- nected with all Indian activities of Johannesburg. Was au cloquent and convincing champion of the Indian cause. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 173 OSMAN. Hajee Ahmed; /. Porbandar, Kathiwar, 1847.0 diced Feb., 1927. Came to South Africa, 1890, being among the early [Indian merchants. Started business in Durban, which he conducted till the time of his death; was a large property owner, Public activilics ¢ An ardent worker for the interests of the Memon community, being a foundation member and trustee of the Juma Masgid Trust. Went on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1910, | Sur- vived by widow, 1 son (Fakir Osman) and 6 daughters. PAUL, Henry Louis; b, Madras Presidency, March 18, 1864; deed, June 1, 1935; a7, Ellen Elizabeth Johnson, at Durban, Feb. 25, 1889: Sch. Arrived at Dur- ban in the barque Cmmoti, Sept. 3, 18st. Entered the Natal Railway Service in the same month and sub- sequently became asst. maintenance store- keeper. He Jeft that department five years later and was in service with the African Boat- ing Company. Point, Durban, ancl later with the Durban Borough Police. On Jan. 3, 1889, entered the Civil Service. then at the Stanger Magistrate's Court, as Indian interpreter. On Dec. 2 of the same year transferred on promotion as clerk and senior Indian interpreter, to the Chief Magistrate’s Department, Durban, a position which he held under three Governments-—Natal Crown Colony Government, Kesponstble Government, and lastly the Union Government, His splendid record was said to be unique in the service, added to which was his exemplary, unblemished and excellent character. He retired on March 18, 1924. He was thanked by the then Minister of Justice (Mr. de Wet) for the unique record of over 34 years’ continuous Government service, without a single day’s absence. Addresses culogising his services were presented to him by the staff of magistrates and other civil servants, with which the Bar also associated If, and also the Indian community. He was also «a keen public worker, particularly in the field of education, and was instrumental in establishing the first Government School for Indians in Durban. He was a devout Roman Catholic aud an active worker for the Indian section of the Church, Through his efforts, the first priest to-work exclusively among Indians and to take charge of St. Anthony's Mission came ont. Other postions he held included . First presdt. and fornder, Indian United Fleven Cricket Club; Natal Indian Football \ssocn. : Greyville Sporting Assocn. : Greyville Cycling Club; United Sporting Assocn. : Higher Grade School Club: Natal Indian Eeucational Assocn.: Higher Grade School Old Boys’ Assocn. : Indian Benevolent Society Indian Clerks’ and Inter- preters’ \ssoen. RAWAT, Ebrahim Cassim ; bh. Nana Varachha, dist. Surat, about L850. died, 1929, A pioneer merchant in Natal. Settled in Mar- itzburg, where he spent the rest of his life. Founded the firm of E. ©. Rawat in 1880, general dealers. Was highly respected by all sections of the com- munity. Is survived by two sons, Moosa Ebrahim Kawat, Dur- ban. and Ismail Eb- rahim Rawat, Muaritz- burg, and Mrs. Mahomed Jeewa, of Durban, and RUSTOMJEE, Parsee, merchant and philanthropist; #. India. One of the yoncer merchants in South Africa and con- nected with Indian wublic life since his arrival. Suffered several terms of im- prisonment during the Passive Resistance movement. On his death bequeathed, with nis wife, Jerbai, the major portion of his estate for the use of the Indian community, crecting the M. Kk. Gandhi Library, Kustomjee Hall orphanages, schools and other educational requirements. His bequest is the Jughest gift to the Indian) commuanity in South Africa. SAMMY, Mapplysamy Pillay ; 6. Tanjore, about 1856, dicd Kimberley, August, 1933. 4 sons and 2 daughters. Left Madras with tis parents for Mauritius. later he alone came to South Africa, being among the pioneer Indians to settle in Port Elizabeth. Subsequently removed to Nimberley. where he was in business, being one of the prominent tndian citizens of the Diamond City. He was one of the first Indians to become a wholesale merchant in the Cape. He was highly respected by all sections of the community and was intimately known to the many pionecr Europeans prominently connected with the develapment of Nimberley.

---

## Page 13

THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 175 174 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SODHA, Rambhabai; late wife of Ratanjhi Mulji Sodha* 6. 1893, dred 1928. Arrived with her husband in Natal in 1905 and be- came associated with all her husband's public activities. She was the first Gujarati la‘ly arrested in the 160) Passive Restst- ance struggle. — Fler arrest was described in the Indian Press as “war on women.” At the time of her arrest she nad her baby daughter, the late : Laxhmi, wife of Devaraj Madhavjee Gadhia, Lourenco Marques. She, like her husband, whom she pre- deceased by a year, always showed a keen interest in the progress of her community. SOBRUN, Dhanook- dharie ; was Civil Ser- vant, Senior Interpreter and Commissioner for Oaths; b. May 14, 1880, at Duff's Road. Natal; educ. at the Railway Day and Night Schools. In 1903 os. youngest daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs. Dabee, of Pietermaritzburg— the well known and progressive old colonist of the day, Was first employed on the late Natal Government Railways, as messenger, timekeeper of Indian and Native staff, and a latterly as clerk-in-charge of the Railway Vost Oftice, Durban. Received appointment in the Union Civil Service as an Indian interpreter-clerk, at Howick (Lions River District) on February 1, W911; was transferred, on promotion, to the Law Courts, Durban, on June 1, 1922. In July, 1932 was promoted to the Senior Indian interpretership, and on January 18, 1935, was appointed Commissioner for Oaths, being the first Indian Civil Servant in Natal to have the appointment conferred upon him. He had taken a prominent part in Hindu religious, educational, social and charitable organisations, was one of the trustees of the following institutions : (1) Shri Thakurdwara and Dharmasala, Durban (the leading Hindi Hindu Temple in Natal); (2) Shri Ramayan Sabha, Overport, Durban (an institution which has done much for the teaching of the Hindi (mother tongue) and the first Society to bring out a Hindi teacher and preacher from India); (3) Nagri Par- charani Sabha, Howick, Natal; (4) School manager of the Overport SRS. Government-Aided [Indian School appointed by the Education Department of Natal Province. Died \ugust 13, 1934. SODHA, Ratanjhi Mulji ; b. Rajkot. disf. Kathtawar, 1885; died Aug. 12, 1930; ede. Rajkot High School. After schooling became business manager of The Kathiawar Times. At this time became connected with Mahatma (then Mr.) Gandhi, being the printer of the famous green pamphlet con- taining grievances of Natal Indians. He de- cided, on being invited by Mr. Gandhi, to come out to Natal in ; ; order to serve his countrymen. On arrival an Natal joined late Mr. Madanjit in founding the International Printing Works, which later printed The Indian Opinion, After few years: resigned and started business. At outbreak of Passive Resistance in 1907 left business and joined Mr. Gandhi in the ‘Transvaal and served with his wife, both being con- victed, suffering several terms of imprisonment. In 1911 took up residence in Transvaal, being, ad- mitted as an educated entrant with six other Indians. Always associated himself with public work right up to time of his death. Founded Gujarati Samac har. His friendship with the Indian Nationalist leader, Mahatma Gandhi, continued throughout, to whom he wave his sons, Revanshanker, who suffeced imprison- ment in the 1913 struggle, and Chotalal who was at Phoenix and at Sabarmati with him. Attended the S.A.1,C. Conference as Transvaal delegate to the Durban sessions which were presided over by Mrs. Sarojini Naidu. +o TIKLY, Hajee Ismail ; b. Kholvad. Onc, of the pioneer merchants of Pictersburg. He arrived in Durban in 1885. He was manager of the firm of Aboobaker Amod, Durban, In 1880 came to Transvaal and started business in Pretoria. During the Boer War returned to India, from there going to Bourbon. After a short stay he came back to South Africa in 1902 again took up residence in Pietersburg. He was one of the founders of the Pietersburg Mosque and took an active interest in the Mosque work at Kholvad. Survived by three sons ; Amod (Pietersburg) Suleman (Zecrust) and Mahomed (Pietersburg). Died at Zeerust, 1919. Eminent Indians in South Africa’s Service 1926; C.B.E. 1922; 6. 189}: s. of Rai Bahadur S. P, Bajpai, Rajur Misra, Cawnpore; two s. four d, Educ. Muir Central Coll., Allahabad ; Merton Coll., Oxford. Entered I.C.S. 1914; served as under- secretary to Govt. of United Provinces and as Secre- tary for India at Imperial Conference, 1921, and at Conference for Limitation of Armaments, Washington, 192{-22; deputed to visit Canada, New Zealand, and Australia to investigate status of Indians, 1922; under-secretary to Government of India, Education, Health and Lands Department, 1923; officiating deputy secretary, 1924; was secretary to Indian Deputation to South Africa, 1925-26, and to Rounct Table Conference on Indian Question in South Africa, 1926-27 ; also adviser to Indian Delegation, Imperia Conference, 1926; Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Education, Health and Lands. 1927-29; adviser to Indian Delegations to 10th Assembly of the League of Nations and to Conference on Dominion Legislation, 1929; joint secretary to the Government of India, Department of Education, Health anc Lands, 1929; adviser to [ndian Delegations to Ith Assembly of the League of Nations and to the Imperia Conference, 1930; joint secretary to the British India Delegation to the Indian Round ‘Table Confer- ence, first and second session; member-secretary of the Government of India Delegation to the scconc Round Table Conference with representatives of the Government of the Union of South Africa, 1932; Secretary to Government of India Department of Education, Health and Lands. Address : 2, King George's Avenue, New Delhi, India. Bie” Sir Girja Shankar, Kt. 1935; C.LE. ABIB-UL-LAH, Sahib Bahadur, The Hon. Khan Bahadur Sir Muhammad, K.CS.L.. ey. 1927; WCE, cr. 1994; Kt. cr. 1922: C.LE, 1920; leader of the Indian Delegation to South Africa, 1926-27; Diwan of ‘Travancore since 1933; 4. 22 September, 1869; s. of late Aushukh Hussain Khan Sahib of the Carnatic family; om. Sadathun Nisa Begum; three s. four @. due. Zilla High School, Saidapet. Joined the bar, 1888; from 1901 devoted whole time to local eclf- government and held the positions of chairman of the Municipal Council, president of the Taluk Board and president of the District Board ; presented a certificate of honour on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of late Queen Victoria, 1897; Khan Bahadur, 1903; temporary member of the Madras Executive Council, 1919; permanent member 1920-24; commissioner of the Madras Corporation, 1920; member of the Viccroy's Executive Council, 1925-30: attended the Delhr Coronation Durbar in 1911 as guest of the Madras Government and was on that occasion presented to the King Emperor at the Royal Court held at Calcutta; gave evidence before the Royal Commission on decentralisation as also before the Indian Public Services Commission ; served a» a co-opted member on behalf of the Macdras Presidency on the Reforms Committee, and a Member of the Roval Commission on the Superior Civil Services in India, 1923-24; teader of Indian Delegations to J.cague of Nations, Geneva, 1929. Address : Trivandrum, Travancore, India. Club: United, Madras. USAIN, Hon. Mian Sir Fazl-i-, K.C.S.I H cr. 1932; WK.C.LE., cy. 1929; Kt.. cr. 1925; Khan Bahadur; leader, Indian Delegation to the Indo-South African Conference, 1932; member of Governor-General’s I:xecutive Council (Department of Education, Health and Lands} 1930-1935: 6. Peshawar City, 14 June, 1877; ys. of Khan Sahib Mian Husain Bakhah; m.; two s. four d. Educ. Municipal Board School, Abbottabad ; High Schools at Peshawar and Guirdaspur; Govt. College, [.ahore ; Christ's College, Cambridge. Took his degree from the Punjab University and then trom Cambridge Uni- versity; called to Bar, Gray's Inn, 1901; practised st Sialkot, 1901-5; practised at the Bar of the Punjab Chief Court, and the Punjab High Court, 1905-20; Fellow and Syndic of the Punjab University ; secretary of the Islamia College for nearly 14 years; president of the High Court Bar Association ; president of the Special Punjab Provincial Conference concerning Reforms; Minister for Education, Punjab, 1921-23 and 1924-25, temporary member for Revenue and Education of the Governor-General’s Executive Council, Aug.-Nov., 1925; Minister for Education, Punjab, Nov. 31-Dec., 1925; Revenue Member, Punjab 1926-27; substitute delegate for India to the Assembly of League of Nations, 1927; Revenue Member, Punjab, 1927-29; Officiating Member of Governor-General’s Executive Council (Department of Education, Health and Lands), 1929; Revenue Member, Punjab, 1929-30; LL.D. Punjab University, 1933. 9 Publications - A number of Lectuves. Recreations > riding and tennis. Address: The Retreat, Simla: 6. King Edward Road, New Delhi. Clubs : National Liberal ; Chelmsford, Delhi; Punjab Association, J.ahore. AIDU, Madame Sarojini; president, South N African Indian Congress, 1925-30, Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1914; 6. Hyderabad: e.¢. of Dr. Aghorenath Chattopadhyay, educationalist ; of Bengali Brahmin extraction; ». 1898, Dr. M. G. Naidu, Principal Medical Officer of H.H. the Nizam’s service; two s, two @ duc. Hyderabad; King's College, London ; Girton College, Cambridge. Spenr a year on the Continent ; published three volumes ot poetry in English, which have been translated into all the Indian vernaculars, and some into other European languages ; also been set to music ; delivered Jectures and addre in all the chief cities of India

---

## Page 14

THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO ‘A Great South African Mohandas Karmachand Gandhi Chief Events of his South African Career: Born Porbandar, Oct 2, Called to the Bar... Arrived at Durban. Natal, Admitted as an Advocate, Xatal Supreme Court (Natal Law Socicty’s ob- jection failed). : Founded the Natal Indian Congress . Returned to india : Came back to South Africa : Hostile European demon- stration at the Point, Durban, Jan. 13 sos Formed \mbulance Corps in the Anglo-Boer War —-Sergeant- Major Gandhi Sailed for India Returned to South Afric ia (Uhird visit). Presented Memorial to late Joseph Chamberlain, Secty. of State for the Colonies .. 1869 1893 1893 1893 1894 1895 1899 1901 1902 1902 “<< Sovra AFRICA has : produced some great : iimen, and Gandin is one of } i them. He is also one of the ; i greal men of the world” : —said General Smu ! in an interview, in- Durban. i: May 1933, at the time of Mahat- ima Gandhi's fast of 21 day Started Law Practice in Johannesburg .. soe Founded ‘Transvaal British Indian Association : Organised Retief Work > Outbreak of plaguc in Johannesburg. Started Vhe Padian Opinion... Established “The Phoenix Settlement . : Deputation to Lord Sel- bourne on 1902 1903 1904 190 1904 1905 Lied Ambulance Corps in Natal Native Kebellion Fook the Oath of Passive Resistance against Anti- Asiatic Laws Emigration Act Royal assent .. Addressed Mass Meeting of Protest at Johannesburg— Imprisonment Advocate of Registration : Sul: sequent assault by mob Deputation to lord Elgin on Indian Trading rights and other gnevances Second Deputation to Colonial Oftice Invited GW, South Africa . . Revival of Passwwe Resist ance against 3) tax— Imprisonment soe Gandhi-Smuts Agreement .. Passing of The Indian Relicl Act . Satied for Lonilon : Close o! South African career July, received Gokhale to —General Sinuts 1906 1906 1907 1998 1908 1908 1912 1912 1913 1913 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 177 on questions of social, religious, and educational and national progress: decorated by King Edward with the Gold Kaiser-i-Hind medal for organising flood relief work in Hyderabad ; specially connected with the Women’s Movement in India, and the welfare of Indian students; Member of the Bombay Muni- cipality, 1923-29; one of the leaders of a recent potitical movement for the frecdom of India; elected first Indian woman president of the Indian National Congress, 1925 ; travelled throughout East Africa and South Africa on a political mission on behalf of the Inchian settlers in 1924 ; lecture tour in the United States and Canada, 1928-29: represented India at important international gatherings; Delegate Indian Round Table Conference in London in 1931; member of Government of India Deputation to South Africa mn 1932. Publications ¢ Poetry—The Golden Threshold with a preface by Arthur Symons; The Bird of Time, with a preface by Edmund Gosse, C.B. ; The Broken Wing; stories and articles in English and Indian journals. Aecreaftons : motoring, garden- ing. 4dddress The Golden Threshold, Hyderabad, Deccan, India. Clab > Lyceum. AZA ALI, Sir Syed, C.B.E., 1926; Wt. 1935; R Agent to the Govt. of India in S. Africa. Member Public Service Commission since 1926 ; bh, IXundarki, district Moradabad, 29 April, 1882; a. s. of late Syed Wahid Ali and Aashura Bano ; mm. second c. Saghir Fatima; one s. one d. Educ. Government High School, Moracabad; Muhammadan College, Aligath; 2nd class in B.A., 1902 and Ist class in LL.B., 1907; Allahabad University. Started practice at Bar in Moradabad, 1908: Member of the United Provinces Legislative Council, 1912-20; gave evidence before Islington Commission, 1913, and Southborough Committec, 1919; was one of those responsible for introducing separate Moslem representation in Muni- cipal Boards in the United Provinces; took prominent part in negotiating the Congress-League Compact, 1916; same year removed to Allahabad to practise at High Court; took part in Swaraj and Whilafat movements, but strongly differing from non-co- operation movement, became independent in politics, 1920; Member of the Council of State, 1921-26; member of the North-West Frontier Province Inquiry Committee, 1922; headed two deputations of non- oficial Moslem members of Indian Legislature to Viceroy in connection with Turkish question, 1922 and 1923; gave non-party evidence before Reforms Inguiry Committee, 1924; prestdent of All-India Moslem League, Bombay Session, 1924; successfully moved Government of India to adopt princtple of safeguarding interests of minority communities in public services, March, 1925; member of deputation sent by Government of India to South Africa in 1925 to negotiate a settlement of the Indian question with Union Government ; laid foundation stone of an Indian School in Cape Town, Feb., 1926; delegate, Govern- ment of India’s Delegation to Assembly of Jcague of Nations, Geneva, 1929, Publications : Essays on Moslem Questions, 1912; Review on work done by the First Council of State in 1921-25; a number of political addresses; My impressions of Soviet Russia, 1930. Reereations ; Walking and gardening. Clubs: National Liberal,Chelmsford, Delhi, and Simla, Address: Durban: Orien.. Isipingo, near Durban. Prasad, Kt., cr. 1919; C.LE., 1914; C.B.E., 1926; M.A., BL. Caleutta; LL.D. (Aberdeen), LL.D. (St. Andrews). Suriratna (Navadwip), Vidyaratnakar (Dacca); Vidya Sudhakar, Bangaratna (Benares) Jnan Sindhu (Puri); Member Government India deputation to South Africa, 1926; late member Council of State; vice-president, Asiatic Society ; late member Indian Legislative Assembly ; for many years member Bengal Jcgislative Council, Legislative Assembly and Imperial Council; late vice-chancellor, Calcutta University ; member Lytton Committce for Indian Students in England; member Universities Congress of the Empire; member Post Graduate Council member Geneva League of Nations Assembly” 2nd s. of Rai Bahadur Soorjee Kumar Sarvadhikary : wm. Nagendra Nandini; twos. three d. Educ. Rames- warpore; Sanskrit College; Hare School; Howrah School ; Bowbazar School ; Presidency College, Calcutta. For several years member of the Municipal Corporation of Calcutta; member of the Imperial Library Com- mittee ; Trustee and Treasurer, Imperial Museum : president Calcutta Temperance Federation, Calcutta Licensing Board, Anti-Smoking Society, Refuge. Incorporated Society of Law, Poetry Society, Calcutta ; Assistant Grand Director of Ceremonies, Grand Lodge of Bengal; vice-president Rotary Club, Calcutta. and various literary societies; president Calcutta University Institute, Gencral Section ; vice-president Sahitya Parishad, Sahitya Sabha, Indian Association ; is a solicitor and advocate of the High Court; was the sub-editor of Samaya Bharatbashi and Hindu Patriotic newspapers. Pubdications - Speeches and Essays, entitled Notes and Extracts; Three Months in Europe; Prabash Patra; South African- Tra ; Travels in Geneva. Memoirs and Reminis- cences; ‘Thoughts and Problems. Died. August, 1933. GO Prasad, tor The late Hon. Sir Deva ASTRI, Right Honourable V. S. Srinivasa, S C.H. 1980; P.C.; Agent of the Government of India to South Africa, 1927-29; president of the Servants of Inca Socicty; 6. 22 Sept., 1869; >. of Valangiman Sankaranarayana Sastri, a Brahman ; wt, (wife d. 1934): one s. one d. Educ. The Native High School, Kumbakonam ; the Government College, Kumbakonam ; schoolmaster at vartous institutions tit! he became headmaster of onc of the biggest high schools in the Presidency. resigned 1906 and joined the Servants of India Society, Poona: Madras Legis- lative Council, 1913; Fellow of the Madras University, 1909; Viceroy’s Legislative Council, 1916-20 ; elected to the Council of the State under the New Reforms Regime, 1920: member Reforms Committee under Lord Southborough; member Railway Committee under Sir William Acworth, 1921-22; visited England in 1919 as member of the Moderate Deputation, and again in 1921 as the Indian representative to the Imperial Conference; represented Inelia at the League of Nations Assembly, 1921, and at the Con- ference on the Limitation of Armaments, Washington : made P.C. and presented with the Freedom of London ; was deputed in 1922 by the Government of India to Australia, New Zealand and Canada, to urge on those Governments the removal of disabilities of Indians lawfully domiciled there; visited England m 1923 as chatrman of « deputation appointed by

---

## Page 15

THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 177 on questions of social, religious, and educationa and national progress; decorated by King Edward with the Gold [aiser-i-Hind medal for organising tlood relief work in Hyderabad ; specially connected with the Women’s Movement in India, and the welfare of Indian students; Member of the Bombay Muni- cipality, 1923-29; one of the leaders of a recent political movement for the freedom of India; _electec first Indian woman president of the Indian Nationa Congress, 1925: travelled throughout East Africa and South Africa on a political mission on behalf of the Indian settlers in 1924; Jecture tour in the Unitec States and Canada, 1928-29; represented India at important international gatherings; Delegate Indian Round Table Conference in London in 1931; member of Government of India Deputation to South Africa m 1932. Publications : Poetry—The Golden Threshold with a preface by Arthur Symons; The Bird of Time, with a preface by Edmund Gosse, C.B. : The Broken Wing; stories and articles in English and Indian journals. Recreations : motoring. garden- ing. .dddress : The Golden Threshold, lyderabad, Deccan, India. Clth > Lyceum. Agent to the Govt. of India in $. Africa. Member Public Service Commission since 1926 ; b. Kundarki, district Moradabad, 29 April, 1882; 0. ». of late Syed Wahid Ali and Aashura Bano ; m1. second c. Saghir Fatima; one s. one d. Educ. Government High School, Moradabad; Muhammadan College, Aligarh; 2nd class in B.A., 1902 and Ist class in LL.B., 1907; Allahabad University. Started practice at Bar in Moradabad, 1908; Member of the United Provinces Legislative Council, 1912-20; gave evidence before Islington Commission, 1913, and Southborough Committee, 1919; was one of those responsible for introducing separate Moslem representation in Muni- cipal Boards in the United Provinces ; took prominent part in negotiating the Congress-League Compact, 1916; same year removed to Allahabad to practise at High Court; took part iu Swaraj and Ixhilafat movements, but strongly differing from non-co- operation movement, became independent in politics, 1920; Member of the Council of State. 1921-26; member of the North-West I'rontier Province Inquiry Conumittee, 1922; headed two deputations of non- official Moslem members of Indian Legislature to Viceroy in connection with Turkish question, 1922 and 1923; gave non-party evidence before Reforms Inquiry Committee, 1924; president of All-India Moslem League, Bombay Session, 1924; successfully moved Government of India to adopt priuciple of safeguarding interests of miuority communities in public services, March, 1925; member ot depntation sent by Government of India to South Africa in 1925 to negotiate a settlement of the Indian question with Union Government ; laid foundation stone of an Indian School in Cape Town, Feb., 1926; delegate, Govern- ment of India’s Delegation to -ssembly of League of Nations, Geneva, 1929. Publications : Essays on Moslem Questions, 1912; Review on work done by the First Conncil of State in 1921-25; a number of political addresses; My impressions of Soviet Russia, 1930. Recreations: Walking and gardening. Clubs: National Liberal,Chelmsford, Delhi, and Simla. <lddress: Durban; Orien., [sipingo, near Durban. R*x: ALI, Sir Syed, C.B.E., 1926; Kt. 1935; ARVADHIKARY, The late Hon. Sir Deva Prasad, Kt., cr. 1919; C.1.E., 1914; C.B.E., 1926: M.A., B.L. Calcutta; LL.D. (Aberdeen), LL.D. (St. Andrews), Suriratna (Navadwip), Vidyaratnakar (Dacca); Vidya Sudhakar, Bangaratna (Benares: Jnan Sindhu (Puri); Member Government India deputation to South Africa, 1926; late member Council of State; vice-president, Asiatic Society ; late member Indian Legislative Assembly ; for many years member Bengal Lcgislative Council, Legislative -Assembly and Impcrial Council ; late vice-chancellor, Calcutta University ; member Lytton Committee for Indian Students in England; member Universities Congress of the Empire; member Post Graduate Council member Geneva League of Nations Assembly 2nd s. of Rai Bahadur Soorjee Kumar Sarvadhikary : m., Nagendra Nandini: two ». three d. Educ. Rames- warpore ; Sanskrit College; Hare School; Howrah School ; Bowbazar School ; Presidency College. Calcutta. lor several years memher of the Municipal Corporation of Calcutta; member ot the Imperial Library Com- mittee ; Trustee and Treasurer, Imperial Museum : president Calcutta Temperance Federation, Calcutta Licensing Board, \nti-Smoking Society, Refuge. Incorporated Society of Law, Poetry Society, Calcutta : Assistant Grand Director of Ceremonies, Grand Lodge of Bengal; vice-president Rotary Club, Calcutta. and various literary societies; president Calcutta University Institute, General Section ; vice-president Sahitya Parishad, Sahitva Sabha, Indian Association : is a solicitor and advocate of the High Court; was the sub-editor of Samaya. Bharatbashi and Hindu Patriotic newspapers. Publications peeches and Essays, entitled Notes and Extracts; Three Months in Europe; Prabash Patra; South African- Travels; Travels in Geneva, Memoirs and Reminis- cences: Thoughts and Problems. Died. August, 1935. ASTRI, Right Honourable V. S. Srinivasa, S C.H. 1930; P.C.; Agent of the Government of India to South Africa, 1927-29; president of the Servants of India Society; 6. 22 Sept., 1869; >. of Valangiman Sankaranarayana Sastri, a Brahman ; mm. (wife d. 1934): one ». one @. LEdtic. The Native High School, Xumbakonam ; the Government College, Kumbakonam; schoolmaster at various institutions till he became headmaster of one of the biggest high schools in the Presidency. resigned 1906 and joined the Servants of India Society, Poona; Madras Legis- lative Council, 1913; lellow of the Madras University, 1908 ; Viceroy’s Legislative Council. 1916-20; elected to the Council of the State under the New Reforms Regime, 1920; member Retorms Committee under Lord Southborough; member Railway Committee under Sir William Acworth 1921-22: visited England in 1919 as member of the Moderate Deputation, and again in 1921 as the Indian representative to the Imperial Confercnce; represented India at the League of Nations Assembly, 1921, and at the Con- ference on the Limitation of Armaments. Washington ; made P.C, and presented with the Freedom ot London : was deputed in 1922 by the Government of India to Australia, New Zealand and Canada, to urge on those Governments the removal of disabilities of Indians lawfully domiciled there; visited England in 1923 as chairman ot a deputation appointed by

---

## Page 16

178 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO the unofficial members of the Indian Legislature to represent the case of Kenya Indians; and again in 1924 on behalf of the National Convention and the National Liberal Federation of India to press for fur- ther constitutional reforms in India. Member, Habib- bulah (1927) and Vazl-i Husain (1932) Delegations toS..\. Vice-Chancellor, Annamalai University 1935. Publica- tions : tbree pamphlets: A Conscience Clause for Indians, Post Puberty Marriage of Brahman Girls, Self-Govern ment for India under the British Flag: speeches and writings on Kenya. Jecreations : swimming. rennis and walking. -Iddvess » The Servants of India Society, Royapettah, Madras. T.4.- Servindia, Madras. O.B.E. 1916; member of the Indian Delegation to South AMtrica, 1926-27; Member, Counci! of State, Government of India; J.P.; Hon. Magistrate: Chairman, Central Bank of India, Ltd., General Manager for India, Burma and Ceylon, Sun Life ‘Assnrance Co. ot Canada; interested in various lines of business; director in many leading Indian Com- panies; 0. 8 Oct., 1866. Educ. Bombay University, B.A. Served on several Government Committees ; member of the Indian Round Table Conference ; ex-president, Bombay Municipal Corporation, Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Indian National Liberal Federation, etc. dddress Canada Building. Hornhy Rd., Bombay, India T.A.: Phiroze, Bombay. Sone Hon. Sir Phiroze, Kt., cr. 19265 INGH, Kunwar Sir Maharaj, Kt., cr 1933. C.LE. 1915; Agent to the Government of India in South Africa 1932-1935; b. May 17, 1878: 2nd s. of the late Hon. Raja Sir Harnam Singh, K.C.1.E. of Kapurthala: md. of late Rai Bahadur Maya Das ol Ferozepore, Punjab 2s Id. Lduc Harrow : Balliol! College, Oxlord, B.A. 1900; M.A. 1901: Barrister-at-law, Middle Temple, 1902 ; entered United Provinces Civil Service as Deputy Collector, 1904: Officiating Registrar, Co-operative Societies, United Provinces, 1908 and 1909; Assistant Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Education. 1911; Officiating Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 1914; Senior Assistant Secretary to the Government of India, Department of Education, 1915 ; Magistrate and Collector of Hamirpur, United Provinces; 1917; Deputy Commissioner of Hardoi, 1918 : Judicial and Educational Sec. to the Goyernment of the United Provinces, 1919; Deputy Secretary to the Government of India. 1920 ; Deputy Commissioner. Bahraich; Commissioner, Allahabad and Benares 1927 to 1931; Chief Minister, Jodhpur State, 1931-32. Publications : Annual Report on the Working of Co- operative Credit Societies in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh for the year 1908-9; Reports on Indian Emigration to Mauritius and British Guiana. and on Mission to Kenya, 1928: Agent's Report to the Government of India fer 1932 and 1933 - and wariou~ contributions to the newspaper press. Home mem- ber to the United Province Govt., 1935. Recreations * Lawn tennis and travelling; boxed (teather-weight) for Oxtord University ¢. Cambridge University in 1899. dddvess: Home Dept., Lueknow, India. INGH, Kunwarani Lady Gunwati Maharaj, S B.A., A.T.C.L. ; wife of Sir Maharaj Singh ; b. Jan. 13, 1889; d. of late Rai Bahadur Mayadas: m. IWunwar Maharaj Singh, Feb. 11,1918; 25. 14° educ. Dufferin High School (now known as the Kinnaird High School for Girls, |.ahore) 1907-1912 graduated in arts from the Isabella Thoburn College (University of Allahabad) ; Winner as student. being bracketted first with another, of the Sir Syved Bilgrimi prize for English literature, Subject : Tennyson's women and a second time a comparison ot the characters of Jane Austen and Charlotte Bronte ; winner of several prizes in elocution. Studied Music. securing A.T.C.L.; Jecturerin History and Literature, Isabella Thoburn College, 1914-16 - 1916-17 St. Mary’s College, London University, Diploma for Teachers. Returned to India, Oct., 1917, touching South .\frica en route. In India invited to occupy chair in Persian, having taken it as second language for the B.A., at the Isabella Thoburn College. After marriage took active part in work of women’s advancement, member of the Purdah Club in Simia, and in welfare work in Bahraich, Oudh, Allahabad and Jodphur. Elected member of the board of the Theosophical Girl School, Mlahabad ; one of the organisers of the I niversity Women's movement in India, [From 1932-35 in South Africa where she laboured urceasingly in the cause of social and women’s uplift, and did much to create a new outlook in regard to the improved attitude towards Indian womanhood in the country. She shared equally with her husband, i the latter's successful period in the office of the Agent to the Government of India in South Africa. Address: Lucknow, India. ENKATA REDDI NAIDU, Sir Kurma, Rai Bahadur, Kt., cy. 1923; Agent ol the Govern- ment of India in South Africa. 1929-32 ; Member of Governor’s Executive Council, Madras, since 1934 : b. 1875; om. 1896, R. Laxmi Kantamma ; three s. two d. Educ. Arts College; Rajahmundry; the Madras Christian College: Madras Law College. B.A. Madras University, 1895: B.L. 1900; Professor ot Physics in the Arts College, Rajahmundry, 1895; joined the Madras Bar, 1900; member and vice-president Polavarum Taluk Board, 1901-4: member District Board, Godavery, 1901-4; member Municipal Council, Rajahmundry, 1901-4° chairman Municipal Council. Rajahmnndry, 1903 : member Municipal Council, Ellore, 1906-15 : president Fllore Taluk Board, 1912-20: member Krishna District Board, 1912-20; led the Non-Brahmin deputation before the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Indian Constitutional Reforms, 1919; member of the Imperial Legislative Council, 1920: Minister for Agricultnre and Industries in the Madras Government, 1920-23 : member of the Madras Legislative Couneil, 1¢2)-26 ; member of the Senate of the Madras University, 1924-26: Member of the Syndicate of the Andhra University, 1924-26; special lecturer on Indian Constitutional Law, Madras Law College, 1927-28 { {ndian delegate to the Assembly of the League of Nations, Geneva, 1928. 4ddress Executive Council, Madras, India. Clubs. Cosmopolitan, Madras ; Orient, Durbar. 4 + oe - r THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 179 ANNOUNCEMENT — EXTRAORDINARY. Clothing & Shirt Manufacturers Limited Makers of the Famous “UNIO” Brand of Men’s and Boys’ Clothing, Caps and Ladies’ Hats Have much pleasure in informing their numerous customers that they have now removed to their new premises, where they are equipped with the most modern machinery, and looking forward to receiving your valued orders. P.O. Box 3561, JOHANNESBURG ’Phones : 33-7287 and 33-7288 Trade Enquiries: Telegrams : ‘‘CARMEL,”’ 6lbs. TEA — for 10/- Carriage Paid to any Address in the Union. For 10/- only we send a 6lb. package of HULETT’S or HINDSON’‘S GOLDEN PEKOE, securely packed and postage paid to any address in the Union. Guaranteed freshly packed and despatched direct from factory. Smaller trial box 3 lbs. for 5/3, postage paid. SEND POSTAL ORDER TO: The Tea Blenders Co,, P.O. Box 840 DURBAN

---

## Page 17

180 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO A Home from Home — visit Grocers, Tobacconists, B ALLUM S Newsagents and Delicacy Store TEA ROOM BALLIM BROS. . 1267 Umgeni Road, Durban The Sportsman’s Rendezvous __ PHONE 1070 — “A veritable Mine of Information about the Unions Indian Community » THAT IS THE S.A. INDIAN WHO'S WHO AND COMMERCIAL DIRECTORY NO LIBRARY—PUBLIC OR PRIVATE, NO OFFICE AND NO BUSINESS MAN CAN AFFORD TO BE WITHOUT A COPY, —— South Africa’s Only Indian Reference Book——— Copies are obtainable from : The Managing Editor, “S.A. Indian Who’s Who and Commerctal Directory,” c,o The Natal Witness, Ltd., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Phones 4693/4, 3366 (Switchboard) P.O. Box 567 J. H. ISAACS, GESHEN « Co. Holt’s Buildings, Cnr. Smith and Field Streets, Durban Land, Estate & Financial Agents. Hotel and Business Brokers. Estate Administrators and Secretaries Rents and Interest collected. Loans negotiated. Capital invested on First-class Mortgage. Absentees represented. All Classes of Insurance effected. Principal Representatives for Natal and Zululand : Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society, Ltd. Chief Agents : Employers’ Liability Assurance Corporation, Ltd. Secretaries : Provincial Building Society of S. Africa.

---

