# South African Indian Who's Who (1940)

**Book ID:** whos-who-1940-pt4
**Total Pages:** 20

---

## Page 1

208 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO PURMASIR, Blackie; 6. Durban, 1878; y.s. of Blackie Ram Chou- dri; educ. Boys’ Model School and Higher Grade Govt. Indian School; a. 3rd a. of Beharie Maharaj, late of Ladysmith ; eight s., five d. On leaving school was connected with brother's firm of Dookhan Bros., Grey- ville Mineral Water Works; in 1921 started own business of Dur- ban. Electric Mineral Works, now (Ptv.), Ltd.. admitting — his sons as partners; also director, S.A. Sweet Manu- facturing Co. (Pty.), Ltd., 507, Umgeni Road, Phone 3-7467; is also a large property owner. Public activities Member of the N.1.C.; member of Indian Hospital Advisory Committee; v.-presdt., Durban Arya Samaj and official of other religious and social institutions. In 1933 toured India, where he met many prominent leaders; became shareholder of the Arya Sahitya Mundal, Ltd., Ajmere. Trustee, Gandhi-Tagore Lectureship Trust, 1939. In young days keen cyclist and footballer. Visited Europe 1938 and has travelled extensively in the Union. Address 17 and 19, May Street, Phone 2-3675, Durban, Natal. ABOOBEE, Ha- R jee Hassan’ Em- am, merchant; b. Durban, Dec. 25, 1899; 2nd s. of late Shaik Em- am Raboobee: ». @. of Jate Shaik Emam, for- merly of Donnybrook, one s.; educ. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School, Durban. Con- nected with grand- mother’s business since school days. Now trading (with brother) in own name, as Hassan’s & Abdulla’s Butchery, and Hassan’s Service Stores. Branch at 2, Ascot Street, Durban. Public activities Made pilgrimage to Mecca, 1935, visiting ex rowle Egypt, Palestine, Irak, Syria, Turkey and Greece. 4ddress : (Res.) 27, Florida Road, Phone 3-7627. (Bus.) 2, Ascot Street, and 142, Indian Market, Durban, Natal. RABOOBEE, Shaik Abdulla Emam, mer- chant ; b, Durban, june 12, 1897; ¢. s. of late Shaik Emam Raboobee; om. d. of late Shaik Suliman Raboobee ; educ. Car- lisle Street Government Indian School. Fven during school days was connected with father’s business. For many years took over control maintaining the high' standard of business which was a_ family legacy of his grand- mother, Rabia Bee Bee who was later known as Raboobee, which became the surname of the family--a woman who showed out- standing business ability in her.time. Now takes a passive interest, the active partner being his brother, the business now being known as Hassan's Butchery. Has other business interests; also property owner. Public activities Nisited India, 1933. “Address - (Res.) 27, Florida Road, Phone 3-7627, Durban, Natal. RAGHAVJEE, Nathalal (of the firm of Raghavjee Rugnath & Son), general mer- chants and jewellers ; b. Ranavav, Porbandar State, 1901; 0. s. of Raghavjee Rugnath, merchant and public worker, who suffered a term of 45 days’ im- prisonment at Volks- rust during Passive Resistance Movement ; educ. Verulam, Durban and State College, Por- bandar State. On leav- ing school joined father’s business which was first started as jewellers in 1901, later as Raghavjee. Ragnuth, general merchants and importers. In 1926 joined father’s business as partner, trading as Raghavee Ragnuth & Son. Branch, 60, Wick Street, Verulam. Public activities; Treas., Child Welfare Society, Verulam ; has taken keen interest in the upliftment of the Indian community; also interested in sport. Asst. secty. of the Natal Indian Congress (Verulam Branch}; committee member of the Shri Hindu Gopallal Temple, of which his father was secretary for 32 years; Indian representative on the Verulam Tocal Board. Address ; 17, Moss Street, Phone 55, Tel. ad., “Raghavjee,” Verulam, Natal. RAGA, Dulahb, senior partner of D. Raga & Co.; 6. Alipore, Khambia, 18935; educ. Alipore. Came to South Africa with his parents, settled in Port Elizabeth, where he joined his father’s busi- ness of boot and shve dealers. On father’s retirement became sen- jor partner. Has large property interests in Port Elizabeth. Public activities ; Treas. and trustee, Gujarati Kshytria Mundal, of which he is one of the foundation members; committee member of the Cape Indian British Council. Address : 47, Princes St., Phone 4280, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. RAGA, Ratanjee; junior partner of 1. Raga & Co., b. Alipore, Kkhambia, 1897; educ. Alipore. Came to Port Elizabeth with his par- ents in 1910; entered father's business. On his father’s retirement the firm's name was changed to D. Raga & Co. of which he became the junior partner; with his brother he has joint interests in property ownership. Public actwities: A keen worker in the interests of the Gujarati = Kshyiria Munda!, former treas. of the Mundal!, and an active participant in all matters affecting the com- munity. Address : 47, Princes St., Phone 4280, Port Elizabeth, C.P. RAHIM, Abdul; 2nd s, of late Abdul KKarrim ; 5. Vesma, Surat, «1900 ; educ. Vesma and Zeerust. Came, with his brother, Abdul Kader, to South Africa in 1912 and joined his father’s busi- ness of A. K. Rehman, Linokano, established 40 years ago, being the oldest firm in the dis- trict and the fact that it has been permit- ted to trade ina Native reserve is a proof of the high es- teem in which the firm THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 209 has been held. After father’s death became a partner, assuming proprietorship in 1924 on death of his uncle and elder brother. Has added to the spirit of con- fidence first created by the founder of the establish- ment. Has admitted son, R. Shaikh, into the business. Has branch at Gerdan, Lichtenburg. Phone 2. ‘Takes a close interest in the progress of his community and is a liberal supporter of all deserving appeals. dddress > P.O. Linokano, l’hone 2, via Zeerust, Transvaal. Le eataneal RAHIM, Shaikh Mo- hamed; 6. Olpad: dist, Surat, 1884 ; educ. Olpad and Bulsar. Came to South Africa early in 1900. Settled in Cape Town, engaging in commerce as general dealer, wholesale fruit- erer, etc. Public work : Has taken active part in all matters affecting Indians and other non- Europeans—social, ed- ucational, municipal and Parliamentary. As soon as he arrived, he recognised need for some elementary educa- tion among the Indian community. He started a night school at his own expense and founded other similar institutions. Was among first to see the strength of an All-Union Indian Organisation, drawing Mr. Gandhi's attention to the fact in 1907. Sub- sequently he helped in the establishment of what is now the S.A.I.C. Sponsored other conferences in the Cape to oppose anti-Indian measures in 1916 and other dates. Took prominent part in consolidating the position of Indian traders as to their licences. As a public man he has come into contact with members of the Government and Legislature. He saw need of an Indian Agency in South Africa and submitted a statement to this effect to the Paddison Deputation in 1925. Has appeared before numerous commissions and was thanked by the Paddison and _ other deputations for his information on Indian questions. Had consistently opposed the condonation and other schemes, which he considered would reduce the Indian population. Is secty. of the Bababia Muslim Soc. {charitable body); presdt., Market Buyers’ Assocn. ; chairman, Cape Indian National Assocn. ; was appointed leader to South African Indian Federation ; member, Coloured and European Joint-Council; member, South African Party (Peninsula) Council ; executive member, Indian Traders’ Assocn.; chairman, Cape, Wynberg and District Sports Club; member, Literary and Debating Society and of other institutions. Address ; 12, Chester Rd., Walmer Estate, Cape Town.

---

## Page 2

RAHIM, Mohomed Abdul ; 6. Surat, 1887. On arrival in Natal, started as a bookkeeper and sales- man. In 1922 estab- lished own business as a general dealer, with which he is still con- nected. Trading as M.A. Rahim. Director, Alfred County Baking Co. Trustee, estate C. G. Moodley. Public activities ; Trustee es- tate Abdul Kader and Madressa Anjuman Is- lam. Takes a promin- ent part io the affairs of the community. 4ddress : P.O. Box 42, Phone 35, Port Shepstone, Natal. RAI, Anand; 8. Phoenix, Natal, Oct. 16, 1883; ¢. s. of late Tiloki; educ. Boys Model School, Durban, and private study, under Dr. T. C. Loram, then Inspector of Schools, Coast,and now Professor of Education, Yale University. On leaving school joined Natal Goverment Rail- way service, a few months later trans- ferred as teacher on the staff of the Railway Government Indian School, which has since changed to the Depot Road Government Indian School, the largest primary school in Natal. Education, it may be said, is both his profession and his hobby, for all his public activities have been centred round his work. Was one of the founders and the first presdt. (twice), now life v.-presdt. of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society. Appeared before the Russell Commission, the Provincial Inquiry Committee on Vernacular Education and the Natal Provincial Inquiry on Indian Education, 1928. and as presdt. led a number of deputations before the Education Department. Is the oldest Indian principal employed in Government Indian schools in Natal. Was secty. to the H.R.H. the Prince of Wales’ Reception Com- mittee ; member of the Indo-European Joint Council, and the only Indian representative of the non- European Carnegie Library Committee, v-presdt, Durban Indian Club; visited India to see his ancestral home in Bengal, 193 d 1939. Address: (Res.) 120, Kenilworth Rd., Sydenham. (Bus.) Depot Road Government Indian School, Durban. Natal. RAJCOOMAR, Lutchman ; 4. Verul- am, Natal, 1896; @. s. of late Bodha Lutch- man; a, 3rd d. of Guloo, of Temple Halt, Umgeni, three d. 5 educ. Wesleyan Indian School, Verulam. Was in private employment. Started own business first as wood and coal dealer, 1926. Since 1932 started under- taker’s business, being the first Indian to enter this class of occupation; conducting business in own name. Piblre ac- fivities - Trustee of Shri Gopallal Temple, Verulam ; v.-presdt., Indian Benevolent Society, Durban: member of the Child Welfare Society, Durban and Verulam; was treas., Colonial Born Indian Assocn., 1936; member of the Colonial Born and Settlers’ Indian Assocn.; committee member of the Natal Indian Congress, Vervlam Branch; asst. freas., Indian Hospitals" Dental and Optical Benefit Society. Marriage Officer to his own caste group, Ieenly in- terested in sport ; member of the Verulam Temple C.C. ; foundation member of Greenwood Park Tennis Club and is an official of other sporting bodies; chairman of the Indian Young Men's Society, Verulam ; committee member of the Verulam Indian Ratepayers’ Assocn. Address (Res.) 2, Tron Street, Verulam. (Bus.) I4, Cross Street, Phone 2-4169, (Night Phone) 6- 1546, Durban. RAJCOOMAR, Ramiall; 6. Ghazi- pur, United Province. Came to South Africa, April 4, 1875, settled in Durban. After pri- vate employment, started own business as cartage contractor, with which he 1s stitl connected. ds a large property owner. Public activifies ; a trustee of the Shree Vishnu Temple, Durban ; trustee of Rastria Pat- sala, Clairwood ; com- mittee member of the Gokhale’s Memorial Hall, Tongaat. Is a highly respected member of the Indian community. Visited Europe in 1934. Made several trips to India. Address : (Res.) 43, Station Rd., Phone 3-7370. (Bus.} 31, May St., Phone 2-6018, Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 211 = | |S < > } < ej | > iw: z a md MAHABEER RAMAWTHAR, The late M. RAMAWTHAR ; BENEMADHO RAMAW THAR; dairy proprietor ; 6. Durban, 6. Bahreich, United Province, 1862; &. Durban, Natal, 1895; 2rd s. of Natal, Nov. 10, 1891; ¢. s. of late three s., two d. A pioneer Indian, late M. Rame th _ hree M. Ramawthar; three s., three d.; arrived Natal approximately 1880. ate M. amawthar ; three Se educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian Employed by the Natal Government two d.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. School, Durban. On leaving school Railway. Served first five years at Indian School, Durban. On leaving joined printing industry, being Ladysmith, thereafter settled in school joined father’s dairy business. connected with Josiah Jones, Durban; was in several occupa- On closi {dairy joined irvi i printers, for 26 years. Thereafter tions, dairy, fish and fruit. Public n closing of dairy, joined Irvington connected with Irvington Dairies, activities : Associated himself with Dairy. Public activities » Committee for nine years. In 1938, with Hindustani activities, social and member, Durban Hindi Temple. brothers, started own business, religious. A foundation member Holds various official positions in of the Depot Road Hindi Temple. : . oe only Indian dairy conducted on Died in Durban, 1926. Angling Clubs. One of those respon- modern lines. Also business at __ —_— sible for raising a large sum of money endian market. penne eee towards the Girls’ School, con- mmittee member, Durban Hindi . - Temple and connected with all ducted by the Temple. Recreation public activities of his community. Angling. Address ; 68, View Street, Formerly played soccer and cricket. Durban, Natal. Address >; 255, D’ Aintree Avenue, Phone 8-8991, Sydenham, Durban, Natal. , OWRI SANKER RAMAW- trading as Highwood Dairies, the Dairy of which he is jomnt pro- prietor. Fram a small beginning has developed the business into one ' of the leading dairiesin Durban. Has a modern enterprise and some of the finest cattle in the country. Address ; (Res.) “Amrit Bhawan,” Silver Palm Road, Overport, Dur- ban. (Bus.) 243, D’Aintree Avenue, Phone 8-8991, Sydenham, Durban, Natal. THAR, dairy proprietor; b. Durban, Natal, Nov. 24, 1909; 3rd s. of late M. Ramawthar ; educ. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School, Durban. On leaving school joined Irvington Dairy. Leaving in 1936, started the Highwood

---

## Page 3

212 THE SOUTH AFRICAN RAJPAUL, Soobran, estate and financial agent; 6. Sydenham, Durban, Oct. 31, 1900 ; e. s. of late J. Soobran ; educ, St. Aidan’s In- dian Provincial Train- ing College, Sydenham. After a period of pri- vate employment as bookkeeper, started own business as estate and financial agent, 1922. Proprietor of Rajpaul & Co., real estate agents, etc. Public activities : Committee member of the Sydenham Rate- ; payers’ Association; member of the Natal Indian Congress; served on sports administrative bodies ; was secty. of the Mayville DILF.A., 1923; hon. life presdt., M.D.L.P.A.; trustee of Sports Ground M.D.LF.A.; presdt. and foundation member, Moon- lighters T.C. ; foundation member of the Natal Lawn Tennis Assocn. and secty. at time of inauguration ; presdt., 1931, now life v.-presdt.; foundation member, S.A.[. Tennis Assocn,, first secty. and treas., 1932 to date. Repstd. district in several [ater-Town and district matches. Recreation : Tennis. dddvess : (Res.) 29, Garbutt Road, Phone 8-8628, Sydenham. (Bus.) 5, Madoline Buildings, 439, Smith Street, Phone 2-0491, Durban, Natal. RAMBRAN, Gopaul- singh, clerk; 06. Isi- pingo, Dec. 31, 1890; m. {Ist} late Paran- pathee, 2nd d. of late Began Panday, former- ly of Escombe, 1910, who died in 1916, (2nd) Rampeeari, o. d. of late Ramlallsingh of Suther- lands, 19t8, one s., two d.; educ. \sipingo In- dian School and private study. Employed at African Explosives and Industries, Ltd., Um- bogintwini, since May, 1908. Public activities : Founded Isipingo In- dian Society in 1918 of which is trustee, hon. secty. and treas.; presdt., D.I.F.A.: — patron, tsipingo Debating Society ; v.-presdt.,5.C.1. Railway Passengers Union; secty. and treas., Reunion Bhagan Mundal ; treas., Kynoch [.F.C.: presdt.. Merebank Indian Assocn.; auditor, Merebank Hindi School; associate member, Merebank Debating Society ; auditor, S.C.D.LF.A. and Clairwood Hindi Rusthrya Patsha ; patron, Sawoti Sanathan Dharma Sabha; delegate of Isipingo Branch of N.UA.; actively interested in the service for the poor. Address; Clo Jadwats Building, Isipingo, Natal. RAMA Gopal, mer- chant tailor; 6. Varad, dist. Surat, 1870; 2nd s. of late Gopal Lala, formerly of Varad ; two d.: educ. Varad. Came to South Africa in 1904, settled in Johannes- burg. where started business as merchant tailor, being associated with brother, late Kahan Gopal. Public activittes ; Member, Transvaal Darji Mun- dal. Address > 384, Delarev Street. Phone 35-2603, Vrededorp, Johannesburg, Trans- vaal. RAMA Parshotam, merchant tailor: 6. Vankaner, disf. Surat, 1913; ¢. s. of Par- shotam Prema; #., ones; educ. Vankaner. Came to South Africa in 1927, settled in Jo- hannesburg ; started own business — with father as merchant tailor in L927 ; trading inown name. Address: 37, Maddison Street, Phone 24-1039, jeppe, Johannesburg, Trans- vaal, RAMASAR, Devna- rain, merchant; b. Umiainto, fan. 11, 1912; e. s. of R. Ramasar : educ. Sydenham Boys’ School, Durban, Um- zinto and private study. First connected with teaching; was at Es- peranza Indian School, due to his instrument- ality that the school received grant-in-aid. Was also on the teach- ing staff at the Um- komaas school. Since 1937 engaged in general dealer’s business with father. Public activi- ties: Secty., treas. and trustee of the Sanathan Dhrama Sabha; trustee of the Hindu Burial Board ; secty. and treas., Umzinto {Indian Traders’ Assocn. ; committee member of the Indian Lawn Tennis Club ; member of the S.P.C.A. Indian Auxiliary. Address : P.O. Box 23, Umzinto, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S ‘WHO 213 RAMCHAND, Gur- dasmal, also known as R. G. Teikamdas ; 6. Hyderabad, Sind, 1879; educ. Hydera- bad; 3rd s. of late Gurdasmal. Arrived in South Africa in 1897, first. staying in the Transvaal. At the out- break of the Boer War, settled in Port Eliza- beth, where he started business in silks and oriental ware, develop- ing it into the largest Indian concern in this class of business in South Africa, with branches in Cape Town and Johannesburg, and a buying house in Kobe. A progressive business man with undoubted ability. He is the head of the firm of Teikamdas Bros., which has a large number of employees, including many Europeans. Public work : Has associated himself prominently with all matters affecting the Indian community, has entertained distinguished oversea Indian visitors, and has done acts of public service that have won for him the respect of all sections of the community. His support of charitable objects has been extended equally to both Indian and European. His assistance towards Indian welfare work in all parts of the country is well known Trustee & presdt., Port Elizabeth Crematorium Society. Address : (Res.) 37, Chapel St., (Bus.) Strand St., Phones 2441-3791, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. Budree, merchant; &, Maritzburg., August, 1905; ¢. s. of Budree Nohar Shah; educ. York Road Govern- ment School and Pri- vate High School, P.M.Burg.; om. d. of R. Ramasar, Umzinto. On leaving school en- tered business in 1920. Public activities : Patron, Naw Yuvuk Pracharnee Sabha; secty., Veda Dharma Sabha, 1929, 1932-39: was secty.,, Vedya Pracharnee Sabha, 1928-29 ; treas., 1924-27; secty., South African Vedic Conference, P.M.Burg., 1928; acted as secty. to several visiting missionaries from India. I” Sport: Career dates from 1921; v.-presdt., M.D.ILF.A.; secty and treas., M.I.C.U., 1929-35 ; secty. and treas., N.1.C.U. (1937), and presdt., 1938; secty. and treas., MI. Referees’ Assocn., 1933-35; councillor, N.I.C.U., M.LS.A. and N.LE.A.; presdt., Pirates F.C., 1933-39; secty., six years ; secty., Pirates C.C, 2 years and of M.L.C.C, six years, now presdt. four years. Managing Director, Saraswati Cinema (Pty.), Ltd. Prominently connected with other public activities. Address: 460, Greyling St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. 14 RAMKALOWAN,; Tooranti; 6. Maritz; burg, Aug. 21, 1900 y. s. of S. Tooranti educ. St. Anthony's and Higher Grade Govt, Indian School, P.M.Burg. Since leav- ing school has been in private employment, Public activities : Executive (P.M.B. Branch) ; secty. of the Arya Samaj, P.M.B.; was presdt., Maritz- burg Young Men's Club; holds off ial and membership pus tion of various socia and religious bodies. In 1934 retired as an active soccer player due to an accident to his ankle; v.-capt. of Natal team which won the}S.A. Indian football tournament in 1932; repstd. Maritzburg in intertown football on 23 occasions, being captain several times. During his captaincy, Maritzburg won the intertown trophy after many years, Was playing member of the Royals F.C. for 17 years, being its captain for many years ; v.-presdt., P.M.B. Indian Relief Committee: treas., Colonial Born and Settlers’ Association, Maritzburg. Address » P.O, Box 264, Maritzburg. oo RAMGULAM, Ram- persad, furniture man- ufacturer; 6. Umbilo, Durban, 1906; ¢. s. of Ramgulam, manu- facturer, of Durban, formerly of P.O. Conel- gung, dist. Gonda, Ma- hilla, Garee Bazaar ; m. @. of Bridjmohan, of Lower Tugela, two s., two d.; educ. Govt. Aided Indian School, Verulam. On leaving school in 1921, joined uncle, Bhabooti Bros., Verulam. Started own business as furniture manufacturer in 1927, trading as General Cabinet Works. Also bus owner. General dealer, 1929-31. Public activities Member of the Bus Owners’ Assocn. ; member of the Chamber of Furniture Manufacturing Industry ; member, Shri Sanathan Vishnu Temple, Sydenham. Address : 26-28, George Hill Road, off Randles Road, Sydenham, Phone 8-8909, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 4

RAMGULAM, Sali- kram; 6. Verulam, Natal, Feb. 1, 1912; 2d s. of Ramgulam, manufacturer, of Dur- ban, formerly of P.O. Conelgung, dist. Gonda, Mahilla, Garee Bazaar, India; m. d. of late Ramsaran Sonnar, of Clairwood, Durban ; edue. Verulam Indian School and St. Aidan's Sydenham Boys’ School, Durban. On leaving school, entered his father’s business as furmiture manufacturer; started his own busi- ness as furniture and bedding manufacturer in 1932. Public activities Member, Chamber of Furniture Manufacturers’ Industry, Natal Indian Assocn. - member, Shri Sanathan Vishnu Temple, Sydenham. Hobby : Motoring. Address : (Res.) 310, Randles Road, Phone 8-8654, Sydenham. (Bus.) 232, chamberlain Road, Phone 8-1813, Jacobs, Durban, Natal. RAMPERSADH, M., master printer ; 6. Dur- ban, 1902 ; educ. Govt. Indian School, Umgeni, Durban. In 1918 worked as a printer ; in 1929 started as a master printer, in the firm name of The Dur- ban Printing Co., sole proprietor, printer and publisher of The Rising Sun, established 1938, monthly magazine in English and Hindi. Address > (Res.) 23, Banana Grove, Durban North. (Bus.) 110, Queen Street, Phone 2-4916, Durban, Natal. RANCHHOD, Bhaga, merchant; 6. India. Domiciled in the ‘Transvaal, where he ig the proprietor of a general dealer’s busi- ness. Public activitics : Is a keen public worker particularly interested m the social work of the Prajapatis ; a member of the Trans- vaal Prajapati Assocn, Address : P.O. Box 66, Morgenzon, Transvaal, RAMPORTAL, Sum- bhul, merchant and farmer; }. Blackburn (near Verulam), 1884. When a boy joined father’s business at Umblali ; later opened own store at Nonoti. After father’s death took over the manage- ment of the general dealer’s business. Is also engaged as a cane farmer on an extensive scale, V.-presdt., Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assocn., 1939. Parable activities » Patron, Stanger Indian Foot- ball Assocn.; trustee, Stanger Hindu Veda Dhrama Sabha ; holds a number of other official posts. School manager of the Nonoti Government Aided Indian School. A liberal donor to all efforts directed towards. the improvement of the Indian community, social, sport, religious, political, etc. Address ; P.O. Box 13, Phone 603, Darnail, Natal. RAMTAHAL Kanhie (See under KANHIE). RANA, Choonilal Naran, merchant: 6, Navasari, Bombay, 1890; ¢. s. of Hargovan Moolchand; educ, Navasari. On arrival from India visited Basutoland to investi- gate business possi- bilities but eventually took up permanen residence in Durban, since 1905. Opened general dealers busi- ness at Mayville in 194, developing enter- prise in its present commodious quarters in 1918, which to-day is one of the leading shops in Mayville. Weenly interested in the social and political progress of the community, a member of the Surat Hindu Assocn, and Surat Education Society, Durban, and of the Natal Indian Congress; director, Mayville Theatres (Pty.), Ltd. Address: 1 & 3, Bellair Rd, Phone 8-8491, Mayville, Durban, Natal. Readers are referred to Section I1 for additional names. THE SOUTH AFRICAN RANDERIA, Shap- urji Jivanji, Com- missioner for Oaths, 1939; 6. Rander, dist. Surat, Bombay, 1880; educ. Accountancy In- stitution, passing Senior Bookkeeping Examination of the London Chamber of Commerce, at Bombay, qualified as an account- ant. Arrived in_ this country 1900, stayed in Durban, started business as a_ book- keeper and then opened general dealer's store. Now engaged in busi- ness as shipping and forwarding agent, with his brother, Nasarvanji Jivanjee Randeria, in the firm name of the United Shipping Co. (Pty.), Ltd. Public activities - Took an active part in the Passive Resistance move- ment under Mr. Gandhi, in the Transvaal. 1908, being a member of the first Natal batch of 30, with late Dawcod Mahomed, late Parsee Rustomjee and late M. C. Anglia, to court arrest in Transvaal, being sentenced to imprisonment for three months as one of the leaders, subsequently suffering two further terms of imprisonment, three months and the maxi- mum penalty of six months with late Parsee Rustomjee. Auditor of the Natal Indian Congress, the S.A.LC., Umgeni Road Hindu Temple and other public bodies. Keenly interested in vernacular education, chairman of the Gujarati Literary Society. Sworn translator in the Gujarati language of the Supreme Court of South Africa (Natal Provincial Division). Member of the M,. K. Gandhi Library and Parsee Rustomjee Hall Committee, since its inception. V.-chairman, Indian Hospital Advisory Committee. Member, King Edward VIII Hospital Board. Address : P.O. Box 846, 173, Grey Street, Phone 2-0290, Durban, Natal. RANGIAH, Rev. Theophilus Mano- haram, B.A., minister of religion; 6. Nellore, S. India, Sept. 3, 1897 ; ge. s. of late Rev. John Rangiah, who started the Indian Baptist work in Natal, 1903, under the auspices of Sir J. L. Hulett & Sons, m. Sugunamina, d. of Rev. Dumpala Narra- siah, six s., two 4; educ. A.B.M. High School, Nellore, Mad- ras Christian College, B.A., 1929 ; Ordination = 1920; minister in charge Indian Baptist Church, Natal. Public activities: Was school manager of the Kearsney Government Indian Aided School; deputed by the Natal Indian Congress to assist relief work connected with the blind, etc. Address ; P.O. Kearsney, Natal. RANTANJEE Parb- hoo; 0. Vyara, Baroda State, 1892; educ.Vyara. Came to South Africa 1908; settled in Jo- hannesburg, working as tailor. In 1911 opened business as merchant tailor, under firm name of Anglo-American Tailors. Changed name to Bombay Tailors, 1923, under which he is still trading. Public activities Presct., Witwatersrand Indian Bespoke Tailoring Em- ployers’ Assocn. ; past- presdt., Transvaal Dargi Mundal; past treas., of this Assocn.; past presdt., Indian Section Industrial Council for Bespoke Tailoring Industry for the Witwatersrand ; past executive member Transvaal British Indian Assocn. and Transvaal Indian Congress. Attended several sessions of S.A.1.C. Conferences. A generous donor to all deserving funds. Has travelled extensively in India. In India is a life member of the Vyara Public Library, and of the Women’s University, Poona. Address ; A8b, Market St., Phone 33-4360, Johannesburg, Transvaal. anal RATHANAM, Suran, Indian postal agent and produce dealer ; 6. Pietermaritzburg, Sept. 6, 1909; bro. of S$. Muthray: educ. York Road Govern- ment Indian School, Maritzburg. On leav- ing school entered pro- duce dealer’s business. Commenced own busi- ness in 1932, trading in own name. Sub- postal master, non- European Post Office, Retief Street, and general book-keeper. Public actryrties - Secty. and treas., N.ILLT.A.; auditor, N.IC. (Maritz- burg Branch, now N.I.A.); chairman, Indian Fieod Relief Committee, 1936; secty., Maritzburg [ndian Unemployment Relief Committee ; presdt., Springbok T.C.; was secty., H.G.I. Schools F.C.; was secty., Colonial Born and Settlers’ Assocn. ; _ v.-presdt., M.D.L©.U., and holds various other official posts. Auditor, M.D.I.F.A. for several years; was presdt., Silverton T.C.; v.-presdt., M.I.C.C.; treas., Indian Social Services Committee. Address : (Res.) 5, James Street. (Bus.) 143, Retief Street, Phone 4437, Pietermaritzburg, Natal.

---

## Page 5

216 RASSOOL, Sayed Ahmed, F.B.I. (London) ; Kadree, Chisti, Bokhare and a direct descendent of the Prophet Mohamet ; originally the family migrated to India from Bokhara (Russia) in the 17th century as missionaries ; educ. Pietermaritzburg and Bombay, holds a Lon- don Fellowship Di- ploma in bookkeeping and accountancy. After holding important position§ with several leading Indian firms, commenced own business with brother, Sayed Ajam, at Ladysmith in 1920. In 1916 offered post at Poona and also at Singapore, but declined for the purpose of recruiting men in Surat for the Imperial Army, Oc- cupied several public positions, including treas. of the N.I.C. (Ladysmith); — secty. to several reception committees. In 1928-29 was back in India to join the Swaraj movement but was averse to the policy of non-co-operation. Acted as a peacemaker in the Hindu-Muslim riots in Surat, 1929. Visited Punjab, Afghanistan and Gujarat. Ardent advocate of Hindu- Muslim unity. The family is closely connected with the Imperial Raj and received lands from the famous Emperor Akbar the Great and the Sufi Emperor Aurangzeb as‘ Jageers.”’ Is a keen student of theology, politics and commerce. Secty. to the Muslim Trust and secty. to Muslim Education Advisory Board, Ladysmith. Now secty., Royal Tinsmith Works, since its reconstruction, 1937. Presdt., Buzmi Ikh- wanus Saffa (Muslim Brotherhood Union). Address : 68-70, Albert Street, P.O. Box 27, Phone 127, Lady- smith, and P.O. Box 815, 75, Victoria Street, Phone 2-3445, Durban, Natal. RAYER, Sinnasamy Arumugam, mer- chant; 6. Melaperum- ballam, Madras, 1887 ; 3rd s. of late Sinnasamy Rayer; m. Rangam- mal, d. of Arunachala M. Rayer, two s. ; educ. Melaperumballam. Came to South Africa in 1901, stayed first in East London and then at Kimberley, where started own business as general dealer ; trading as S. A. Rayer, general dealer. Public activi- ties: Treas. of the East London British Indian Assocn., 1912-14; treas. of the Tamil Pro- gressive Assocn., 1912-14; member of the Indian Political Assoco., Kimberley; Hindu Vedic Sabha, Kimberley ; member of the G.W. Benefit Society. ‘Addvess : 2, Hull Street, Phone 374, Kimberley, Cape Province. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO REDDY, Jimmy. general dealer; 6. Glendale, Natal, Dec. 18, 1891; 4th s. of late Bugata Pidya Reddy, formerly tobacco far- mer of Glendale; m. Munima, 3rd a. of late Munsamy Reddy, for- merly of Tongaat, two s., five d.; educ. Dur- ban. On leaving school was engaged in farming In 1913 came to Port Elizabeth, started busi- ness as general dealer, etc. Proprietor of Reddy’s Cafe. Public activities : Former presdt. of the Eastern Province Cricket: Union, also of the E.P.I.F.A.; v.-presdt. and foundation member of the Cape British Indian Council (Port Elizabeth Branch, now Cape Indian Congress) ;_ presdt. of the Shamrock F.C. In younger days active soccer par- ticipant, played for Stellas [.F.C., Durban and Sham- tock F.C. (Port Elizabeth) was also keen on boxing. Interested in all sports. Also official of the Saraswati Educational Institute. 4ddress : (Res.) 44, Mitchell Street. (Bus.) 128, Walmer Road, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. REDDY, Muduray Kaddurvaloo ; 6. Jo- hannesburg, July 19, 1895; educ. Higher Grade Government In- dian School and Indian High School, Maritz- burg. Started teaching career on the staff of St. Paul's Indian School; later head- master, Greytown In- dian School. Resigned to take up appointment in Government Service, accepting post at Lady- smith in 1920, After 12 years’ service trans- ferred on promotion to Port Shepstone. Public activities: Jaterested himself in the administrative side of sport, occupying position of presdt. of the Northern District Cricket Union (for three years in succession). Ex-presdt., Natal Cricket Union ; life v.-presdt., N.D.I.C.U.; member, N.LF.A. executive; v.-presdt., Ladysmith District Sports Assocn. Was secty., Putney Spruit School ; secty., Umzimkulu Indian School Board. Address : Government Indian School, Port Shepstone, Natal. REDDY, Venketasen, civil servant; 6. Isi- pingo, Natal, April 12, 1885; 0. s. of late Velayadum Reddy ; m. d.of late Muthoo Konar formerly merchant of Durban, two s.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School. On Jeaving school in 1904, was in the legal clerical profession. In Jan, 1907, joined staff of In- dian ImmigrationTrust Board as clerk and in- terpreter. Public ac- tivities ; Presdt., Higher Grade Schools C.C., captained it during playing days; member, Indian Child Welfare Society; trustee and treas., Sea View Hindu Cemetery Trust. <dddress ° (Res.) 104, Umhlatuzana Road, Sea View, Durban. (Bus. )} Indian Immigration Bureau, Stanger Street, Phone 2-4678, Durban, Natal. REHMAN, Altaf ; b. Ellore, West Godvari district, 1893; 2nd s. of Abdul Rehman ; educ. C.M.S. High Schoo], ENlore. Came to South Africa in 1908, joined his uncle's firm of Cassim Moosa, Zeerust ; started own business in Zeerust in 1917, subsequently be- came partner of the Gopane Stores in the Native Reserve ; in 1931 acquired sole ownership. Fublic ac- tivities ; Former secty., Zeerust Indian Com- munity; repsd. Zeerust at the S.A.I.C. Conference, Johannesburg, 1925; organised pro-Indian opinion among Europeans who gave evidence before the Lange Commission, and appeared before it himself; was responsible for the local arrangements connected with the visit of Kwaja Kamul-u-din and Lord Headley; repsd. Indian community at various public gatherings. Was presented to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales when he visited Gaberones, B.P., who spoke to him in Hindustani. A keen sportsman in his younger days, winning in 1906, the Northern Sircar Cup open to college athletes. In Zeerust once did much to organise sport among local Indians and played himself, was captain of various sports clubs. Recreation - Reading—being a member of the Zeerust Public Library, Address : P.O. Gopane, via Zeerust, Trans- vaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 217 REGNATH, Rambaran ; 6. Durban, December 26, 1906; ¢. s. of J. Rambaran; educ. St. Aidan’s College and Carlisle Street Secondary School and private study. Passed Senior Indian Teachers’ Examination Certificate. Was a member of the teaching staff of the Cato Manor School. Now at Umhloti Government Aided Indian School. Keenly interested in the activities of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, of which he has been the secretary (twice) and assistant secretary (twice) ; v.-presdt, N.I.T.S. Public activities: Presdt., Durban Indian Schools’ Football Assocn. ; one of those responsible for the Transvaal tour of 1932; secty., Natal Lawn Tennis Assocn.; presdt., Moonlighters Tennis Club: a member of the N.IF.A. Council; official of the Teachers’ Scout Movement, Asst. secty., N.I.T.S.; secty., N.I. Tennis Assoen. ; secty. and asst. district commissioner Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ Assocn. Hobby : sport. Address : 320, Randles Road, Sydenham, Durban, Natal. ROOKNOODEEN, Hajee; ¢. s. of late Khan Sahib Goolam Hoosen Desai, of Chi- plun, Bombay Presid- ency, where he was presdt. of the muni- cipality for many years and was a_ leading merchant ; 8. Chiplun, 1876; educ. Elphin- stone High School and College, Bombay, mat- riculated 1897. Arrived in South Africa in Dec., 1902, settled in Durban. Was first in employment as a book- keeper and in 1908 started own business as general agent, since 1915 trades in job lot of timber and building material. Public activities ; Ever since arrival has been engaged in public activities and was a co-worker with Mr. Gandhi for several] years and an original member of the Natal Indian Congress. Member of the deputation which interviewed the Cabinet in 1924 in connection with the Boroughs Ordinance. A member of the South African deputation to India in connection with the agitation against the Class Areas Bill, 1925. A keen and intelligent public worker and an enthusiast in bringing together the various races for the purpose of securing mutual understanding and goodwill. Was hon. treas. of the Indian Committee organised by the then Mayor, the late Mr. Nicholson, in the Council Chamber in 1915 for Indian community’s contribution to the War Funds. In 1936 went on pilgrimage to Mecca, Medina, Jerusalem, Damascus and_ other holy places, and then visited Egypt, Turkey, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, France and England and completed a tour of 25,000 miles in the three continents of Asia, Africa and Europe. Club: Orient (a member since its foundation). Address ; (Res.} Rooknoodeen’s Bldings, Prince Edward Street. Phone 2-1926. (Bus.) 135, Grey Street, Phone 2-2437, Tel. ad., ‘‘Rook,’”’ Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 6

218 THE SOUTH AFRICAN ROOP, Naran, merchant; is a part- ner in the firm of Roop & Makan, general dealers of Bethal; 6. Eru, Surat, India; three s., three d. Came to South Africa in 1902 first started business in Johannesburg, eventually settled in Bethal ; conducting general dealer’s busi- ness in partnership with Morar Makan; trading aS Roop and Makan, with three branch “stores in the Bethal district. An enthusiastic worker for the improvement of the Prajapati community of the Transvaal. Address : P.O. Box 127, Bethat, Transvaal. ROOPNARIAN, Jugmohun Soob, estate agent ; 6. Syden- ham, Durban, June 22, 1887; 4th s. of late Jugmohun; m., four s., five d. ; educ, Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban. On leaving school joined legal office ; since 1908 with the late R. K. Khan, advocate, etc. Managing ‘clerk of the estate R. K. Khan Hospital and Dispen- sary Trust. Proprietor of the Reliance Land and Estate Agency. Public activities ; Was closely connected with {cothall and other sports administration, holding various official posts; treas. of the S.A.I.F.A., 1935, during the tour of the All-India football team; secty. and treas., Mayville D.D.I.F.4., 1904-8; connected .with the D.D.LF.A. for last 25 years, been v.-presdt. and treas. for many years. Played soccer first for Higher Grade Schools and Sydenham Unity F.C.; repstd. Durban against Maritzburg at Inter-Town soccer, 1907 ; chairman, Sydenham Ward Indian Rate- payers’ Assoca.; chairman, Durban Indian Provident Fund for last 10 years; trustee and presdt. of the Sydenham Hindu Young Men’s Society ; trustee, Sydenham Vishnu Mundal. Address: (Res.) 317, Randles Road, Sydenham, Phone 8-8628. (Bus.) Madoline Buildings, 439, Smith Street, P.O. Box 600, Phone 2-0491, Durban, Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO RUGHUBAR, Til- chun ; 6. Durban, 1899; s. of Tilchun; five s., one d.; educ. Spring- field, Durban. On leav- ing School entered busi- ness; from 1922-37 proprietor of refresh- ment business at the Indian Market. Started undertaker’s business since 1937. Firm name T Rughubar. Also business at Indian Market, Stall 11. Public activities One of the foundation members of the Arya Yuvuk Sabha and Aryan Benevolent Home; was prominently connected with the Indian Market Stallholders’ Assocn. member of the Syden- ham Indian Ratepayers’ Assocn. ; also connected with several sporting bodies, namely, Rosebank Sporting Club, Royals Sporting Club. Actively associated with Boxing and Dramatic Societies. Address : (Res.) 193, Alpine Road. (Bus.) 40, Alice Street, Phones 2-4194 and 6-1409, Durban, Natal. RUSTOMJEE, Sor- abjee, Commissioner for Oaths; 6. 110, Field Street, Durban, Dec. 25, 1895: 2ad s. of Parsee Rustomjee ; educ. Durban, and New High School, Bombay, and Panch- gani,nr. Mahableshwar, Outstanding public worker, connected with Mahatma Gandhi since a youth; imprisoned time of Passive Resist- ance, 1913, went on hunger strike in gaol. Has taken part in practically every public movement and consulted on Indian question by eminent leaders in India. Member of South African Indian deputation to India to agitate against Class Areas Bill and met then Viceroy, Lord Reading. President of S.A.LC. at visit of Fazl-i Hussain delega- tion at Capetown in 1931-1932; occupied residence of Lord de Villiers at Wynberg, to entertain, on behalf of community, members of both Indian and Union delegations. Was first South African Indian, or, in fact, first non-European, to be present at a State Lanquet. Was president, Natal Indian Congress ; again president, 1939. His generosity knows no bounds of caste, colour or creed, and a characteristic of his life has been his devotion to the welfare of his com- patriots. Joint Secty.,N.LA. Address: New India Buildings, 17, First Avenue, Phone 2-5845; Tel. add. “Rustomjee,”’ Durban, Natal. RUSTOMJEE, Jal- bhoy, principal repres- entative of the New India Assurance Co., Ltd., in the Union of S.A.; 6. Bombay, Sept. 30, 1890; ¢. s. of late Parsee Rustomjee : 7. Shirinbai, o. d. of late Eduljee Minbatiwala, formerly of Moradabad, United Province, two s., two d.; educ. Bom- bay, matric. Bombay University. Came to South Africa in child- hood Was connected with father’s business. Public activilies : Trustee of the Rustomjee Jivanjee Gorcoodoo Trust, Bai Jerbai Rustomjee Trust, R. K. Khan Hospital and Dispensary Trust. 4ddress - 17, Virst Avenue, Phone 2-5845 Tel. ad., ““Rustomjee,”’ Durban, Natal. 7 ACGOOR, Tayob ; y. s. of Sacoor Noor Mahomed; Bhanvad, Kathiwar, Dec., 1895; eduec. Bhanvad and Durban. Came to Natal in 1907. On leaving school joined father's firm of Sacoor Noor Mahomed, general dealers, Dur- ban, till 1927. In 1928 started own business in the firm name of A. L. Tayob & Co., as general agent and broker, of which he is the sole proprietor, land, estate and finan- cial agent, representing S.A. National Trust and Assurance Co., Ltd. Acted as executor of the large estate of Moosa Hajee Cassim, 1921-31, and also estate cof late Abdoola Amod. of Amsterdam, Transvaal, from 1922 to date. Prop., Sacoor Noor Mahomed, wholesale merchant and direct importer. Public activi- dies: Chairman, Young Meman’s Society, 1920-25; trustee of the Juma Masjid Trust; v.-chairman, Young Muslim Youth League, Durban. Address: 5-7, Madressa Arcade, Phone 2-5689, Durban, Natal. SALEY, Hassen Mayat (trading as Saley Ebrahim & Co.), wholesale merchant; 6. Alipore, Taluka Chhikly, India, 1883, 2nd s. of late Hassen Mayat ; nine s.; educ. Alipore. Came to South Africa in 1902, settled in Johannesburg. Started own business in Johannesburg as wholesale merchant, 1916, trading as Saley Ebrahim & Co., wholesale merchants and direct importers. Public activities : Trustee of the Juma Masgid of Johannesburg. Address : 47, Market Street, P.O. Box 220, Phone 33-8416. Tel. ad., “Saleyecco,”” Johannesburg, Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 219 SAIB, Mahomed Hussein, merchant ; b, Maidstone, Natal, Oct. 25, 1901; ¢. s. of late Hussein Saib; m. 2nd d. of Abdul Razak of Overport, Durban, three s., three d. ; educ. Fairbreeze Govt. In- dian School. On leav- ing school, joined father’s business, 1921; on father’s death in 1933 has taken charge of the business, Trad- ing as H. Saib & Sons, Also cane planter, general dealer and cafe proprietor. Prhlic ac- tivities Takes leading part in all public work of the district. Committee member, Fairbreeze Indian School; treas., Fairbreeze Sporting Club; treas., Tongaat Indian Mill Group; member of the non- European Board; patron, Anjuman Islam, Tongaat ; committee member, Habiebiah Moslem Society. Interested in the general welfare of the community. Recreation ; Angling. Address P.O. Box 12, Phone 28, Maidstone, Natal. SAM, Anthony Emmanuel ; 6. Kim- berley, June 11, 1887 ; m. Anthonimal Harriet, 2nd d. of Sate A. Lazarus, formerly of Johannesburg. In pri- vate employment for many years, now in business. A very keen sportsman, started soccer career in 1902, retiring 1913; cap- tained G.W.LF.A. team at the South African tournament at Durban, 1913; manager, G.W.LF.A, team of 1920; champion track cyclist at I<imberley’ 1910-13; repstd. Diamond Fields at the Cape Cycle competition at Paarl, 1911: winner billiards championship, Kimberley, 1910. Held various official posts; auditor, S.A.I.F. Board, 1904; secty., G.W.LE.A., 1907-13; secty., Coloured Cricket Board, Kimberley, 1913; presdt., Colonial- Born Assocn., Cape Town, 1925; presdt., Eastern Province Indian Football Assocn., 1926; now life v.-presdt. Address: (Bus.) 5a, Grahamstown Rd.; Phone 3601. (Res.) 8, Shell St., Port Elizabeth, Cape Province.

---

## Page 7

220 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SANNYASI; Bha- wani Dayal; Com- missioner for Oaths; b. Johannesburg, Sept. 10, 1892; 5. of late Jairam Singh, ex- presdt. Transvaal In- dian Assocn.; editc. at Bihar. Leaving South Africa 1904, returned 1912. On return elected presdt. Young Men’s Indian Assocn., Ger- miston, 1913; one of the organisers of the Indian Strike at New- castle in 1913 and was sentenced to term of three months’ im- ptisonment with hard labour, with his wife Jag-rani Devi and child Ramdutt. Edited Hindi section of The Indian Opinion in 1914, Dharma Vir 1917-18, Aryavarta 1931-32. Organised the first and second South African Hindi Literary Conferences in Lady- smith and Pietermaritzburg in 1916 and 1917 respec- tively. Elected a member of Bijolia-Mewar (Rajputana) Commission to investigate grievances of the passive resisters in 1920. Attended and participated in many other political, social, literary and religious conferences during his short stay in India. Founded Jag-rani Press at Jacobs in 1922, Edited, printed and published the weekly Hindi in Hindi and English from 1922 to 1925. Repstd. South African Indians at Indian National Congress, Amritsar 1919, and Gaya 1922 and was instrumental in getting The S.A.1.C. affili- ated to The Indian National Congress. Elected a member of the South African Indian Deputation to India in 1925. Established the Pravasi-Bhawan consisting of a fine library and free school at Bahuara, IXhargarh near Sasaram (Bihar) in 1926. Admitted into the Order of Sannyasis in 1927. Acted as a representative of the S.A. Indian Congress to study the working of the New Immigration Act in the districts of Utrecht and Vryheid rendering valuable assistance. Elected presdt. of the First Indian Overseas Conference held at Brindaban (Muttra) in 1930, Elected presdt. of Shahabad District Congress Committee and was sentenced to simple imprisonment for two and a half years under section 124 (a) of Indian Penal Code for delivering seditious speecnes. Placed in Class A and served his term in Hazaribagh Gaol. Released in 1931 unconditionally by amnesty after serving one year. During the period edited a hand-written monthly magazine Karagay in the Gaol. Published ‘‘a report on the emigrants repatriated to India under the assisted emigration scheme from South Africa and on the protlem of returned emigrants from all colonies”’ jointly with Pandit Benarsidas Chaturvedi in 1931 and subsequently published the “pubic opinion on the assisted emigration scheme under Indo- South African Agreement.’’ Presided at the All-India Hindi Journalists’ Conference at the Senate Hall, Calcutta University in 1931. Presided at tenth Bihar Provincial Hindi Literary Conference at Baidyanathdham (Deoghar) in 1931. Author of many Hindi books, namely : History of Passive Resistance in South Africa, My Experiences of South Africa, Story of My Prison-life, Biography of Mahatma Gandhi, Indians in Transvaal, Natalian Hindu, Vedic Religion and Aryan Culture, Educator and Cultivator, The Vedic Prayer, etc. Elected Honorary Indian Probation Officer; v.-presdt., N.ILC. since 1921. Founder of many political, social, religious and literary societies both in South Africa and India. Single-handed con- ducted, in India, strenuous agitation against proposed segregation measure by Union Govt, 1939; was able to carry the whole country with him, from H.E. the Viceroy to the peasant. Address : P.O. Jaccbs. Tel. add. : ‘‘Sannyasi,'’ Jacobs, Natal, South Africa. SAMUEL, Veera- samy Chinasamy ; d. Maritzburg, 1898 ; 9. s. of late M. Veerasamy ; educ. Pietermaritzburg. On leaving school join- ed the business of his father, being with him for 10 years. In 1920 started on his own; sole proprietor of the Imperial Steam Laun- dry. Public activities : Was v.-presdt., Syden- ham F.C.; foundation member Maritzburg In- dian Lawn Tennis Assocn. ; v.-presdt., Pentrich Protective Tamil School. Visited India 1907, Portuguese East Africa 1930, and travelled in many parts of South Africa 1939. Keen on sport, especially tennis. Address : 35, Church Street, Phone 2733, Maritzburg, Natal. SAMMY, Rama Krishnasamy; ¢. s. of late M. Sammy; 6. Kimberley, 1896 ; educ. Pescod School, Kim- berley. Joined father’s business of general mer- chant, after school. Is in charge of the busi- ness, since 1924, after his father’s retirement. Public work - V.-presdt., Indian Political Assocn,. (affiliated with the C.1.C.) ; v.-presdt., Hindu Vedic Society ; v.-presdt., G.W.LF.A.: active participant in and supporter of all Indian public matters. Address: 66, Jones St., Kimberley, Cape Province. SAMMY, Thanga- chee; 6. Kimberley; e. d. of the late V Sammy, and sister of Lady Raza Ali. educ. Kimberley. Ad- dress: (Res.) 78, Jones Street, Phone 357, Kimberley, Cape Province. +. SARAWAN, Devan- and (Dhew), teacher ; &. Sept. 29, 1910 | educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Pieter- maritzburg. Public ac- tivities Was secty., Mayville Indian Lawn Tennis Club, Durban; asst. secty., Arya Yuvuk Sabha, Durban; secty:, Midlands Dis- trict Indian Schools Football Assoc. ; secty., Maritzburg In- dian Golf Club, Pieter- maritzburg ; councilor, Arya Samaj, Maritz- burg ; councillor and auditor of the Veda Dharma Sabha, Pietermaritzburg, now Councillor, Aryan Benevolent Scciety, Maritz- burg; councillor, Natal Indian Teachers’ Society (Maritzburg Branch) ; v.-presdt., Hindu Youth Club, Maritzburg ; treas., Maritzburg Indian Youth League ; secty. and treas., Maritzburg Indian Sports Assocn. : editor of the Hindu Youth Club Magazine. Hobbies : Golf and reading. Address: 12, Wilham Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SARDIWALLA, Abdulla Amod; 6, Ladysmith, 1906; educ, Ladysmith and private study. On leaving school joined father’s business at Waschbank, later entered his uncle’s firm at Ladysmith, of which he is the managing director. Public activities: A member of the Muslim Library; an associate treas. of the Mosque and interested in all public matters of the community. <A keen sportsman; presdt., Schools F.C. which through his interest and support gained premier position during the 1933 soccer season ; a foundation member of the Mercantile Tennis Ciub. Address : 20, Illing Rd., Phone 119, P.O. Box 62, Ladysmith. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 221 SATYAPAL, Fakir ; b. Durban, 1893 ; educ. Saint Aidan’s Indian Mission School, Cato Manor and self study ; m. Sooryakally Devi; 2s.,6d. Occupation : private employment, Public activities : Since 1913, first a member of the Arya Yuvuk Sabha and a foundation member of the Aryan Benevolent Home, Durban, till 1922; was instru- mental in starting a Hindi School, under the auspices of the Vidya Pracharnee Sabha, Rooikopjes. In 1923 removed to Maritzburg where started Vidya Pra- charnee Sabha, was presdt. and trustee ; secty., South African Rishi Dayanand Centenary Committee (P.M.B. Branch) ; in 1924 formed the Nagri Hithyasht Sabha at Plessislaer, name has since been changed to Arya Samaj; v.-presdt., Aryan Benevolent Society, Maritz- burg; secty., Arya Prithinidi Sabha, 1929-30 ; foundation member and trustee Arya Samaj, Maritz- burg ; vedic preacher, Maritzburg ; committee member, N.LC. (P.M.B. Branch) ; prominent worker, Maritzburg Indian Unemployed Committee; v.-presdt., N.1.C. (P.M.B.); patron, M.I. Boy Scouts’ Assocn. ; v.-presdt., Veda Dhrama Sabha; trustee and patron, Yuvuk Arya Samaj (Clairwood) ; Indian representa- tive, Social Services of S.A.; committee member, Indo-European Joint Council (P.M.B.). A keen student of Hindi literature, isa playwright with local reputation and a composer of religious and national songs. An ardent follower of Mahatma Gandhi; during the fast of the national leader observed sympathetic partial fasts on three separate occasions, Address: 134, East St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SATYAPAL, Soor- yakally Devi ; 6. Dur- ban; m. F. Satyapal, 1912; two s., six @. Public activities : Member, indian Women’s Assocn. (Mar- itzburg) ; member of Natal Indian Congress (Maritzburg Branch) ; popular hostess to many Vedic preachers who visited this country from time to time from India. Annually helped to collect funds for In- dian unemployed com- mittee and a keen sick visitor. Interested in education, giving proof of this fact in her own family. Also interested in all social work. A staunch disciple of Rish Dayanand and a great admirer of Mahatma Gandhi, Address ; 134, East Street, Pietermaritzburg, Natal.

---

## Page 8

222 THE SOUTH AFRICAN SAWJEE, Devraj, merchant jeweller; 6. Durban, 1908; e¢. s. of Devraj Dosa; m. d. of late Soni Valabdas Kathard, formerly of Durban ; educ. Durban On leaving school, joined business as mer- chant jeweller Since May, 1936, with Naran- das Valabdas Kathard as partner, trading as Kohinoor. Jewellers. Public activities: Takes an interest in all public affairs concerning In- dians. Has travelled extensively in the Union. <4ddress - (Bus.) 175, Grey Street, Durban SAYED Shaha- buddin, genera! dealer; 4. Khergam, ast. Surat, India, March 25, 1901; e. s. of Sayed Koot- buddin Badamia:; m., two s., four d.; educ. Dabhel Madressa. Came with father in 1916, settled in Potchef- stroom. In 1918 started own business as general dealer. Trading in own name as Sayed Shaha- bodin. Public activi- ges : Secty., Potchef- stroom Indian School Committee since its inception in 1928; com- mittee member, Madressa and Mosque. and Congress. Takes an important part in religious, educational and social affairs of the Indian community. Gave evidence on behalf of Indian community before Transvaal Education Inquiry Commission. Address - P.O, Box 274, Phone 355, Asiatic Bazaar, King Edward Street, Potchefstroom, Transvaal. SEEDAT, Ebrahim Suleman, farmer and livestock speculator ; s. of Suleman Ebrahim Seedat, of Newcastle ; educ. Newcastle. On leaving school took up commercial career. Started own business as livestock speculator at Newcastle, 1930; trading in own name. Also farming in New- castle district, with general dealer’s store at Newcastle. Address : 44, Murchison Street, Newcastle, Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO SEEDAT, Ahmed Ebrahim, merchant ; 6. Alipore, dist. Surat, 1907; 3rd _s. of late Ebrahim J. Seedat; an, educ. Alipore. Came to South Africa in 1914 settled with father in Johannesburg. Opened own business as general merchant in Market Street, Johannesburg, 1925. In 1927 started in partnership at Turf- fontein, trading as A. E. Seedat & Co. Dis- solved partnership in 1931, then conducted own business, in the firm name of A. E. Seedat & Co.; also branch store at Turffontein, Hollywood House. dddress : 54, Turf Club Street, Phone 32-1069, Turffontein, Johannesburg, Transvaal. SEEDAT, Dawood Mahomed, insurance representative; 6. New- castle, Natal, Feb. 28, 1899; 2nd s. of late M. Le. Seedat, former merchant of Newcastle; im. d. of late 1 RB. Timol, formerly of Durban, three s. ; educ. Newcastle. After leav- ing school joined father’s business. In 1917 started own busi- ness as general mer- chant at Newcastle. Closed 1930 and since then with Manufac- turers Life Insurance Co. of Canada, as chief Indian representative for Natal. Holds the Certificate of Merit from his company for outstanting work, also member of the Two Hundred Thousand Club. Public activities Takes an interest in all matters affecting the Indian community. Address : (Res.) 37, Hampson Grove. (Bus.) 175, Grey Street and Stuttaford Buildings. Phone 2-5931, Durban, Natal. Readers are referred to Section II for additional names. — N > g line of steamers to bring out his goods; boat service, known as the Moosa Line, Public acticitics He gave, with two community: One of the original to South Africa with parents in 1909. Oo leaving school, connected with the management of father’s est. Propr. of MOOSA, Hajee Cassim ; &. Porbandar, 1843; died at Durban, May 16, 1921; 2nd s. of Hajee Cassim Tar Mahomed. Came to South Africa in 1875, landed at Durban, being one of the first Indian mer- chants to start big business in Natal and Transvaal, trad- ing as Moosa Hajec Cassim. Was an enterprising business- man, with branches in Natal, O.F.S., Transvaal. Cape and Portuguese East Africa. He visited England twice to do his own buying. On the first occasion his purchase was so huge that he could not get the regular he decided to buy his own boat, the s.s. Crescent, for transport in 1895. He then started a reguiar passenger between Purban and Bombay. others, the property known as the Porbandar Madressa Trust and Juma Masgid Trust. Donated large sums of money for public needs of the Meman members of the Natal Indian Congress and took a large part in the affairs of the community. Is survived by three sons and cne daughter. ABOOBAKER Moosa, known as A. B. Moosa; e¢. s. of late Moosa Hajee Cassim; . Porbandar, feb. 2, HAJEE Cassim Tar Mahomed Sayani, also known as Cassim Tar: (Hajee Cassim Moosa) FAMILY THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 293 venedsncseested ABDULLA Moosa ; 2nd s. of late Moosa Hajee Cassim ; b. Porbandar, Jan. 15, 1906 ; educ, Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School, Dur- ban. Came with parents to this country when a lad of 3. On leaving school connected with the manage- ment of his father’s estate; Public activities member, deputation before N.P.C. Se- lect Committee on Borough Extended Ordinance, 1934 and 1937: Natal Educational Inquiry Commission, 1936 ; Parliament Select Committee on Industrial Legislation, 1937; repre- rented Cape at the S.A.I.C.at Durban, 1935: ex-executive member, Indo- European Joint Council, 1934; acted as pro tem joint secretary. N.IC., 1036-38; executive member, N.L.C., 1924-7, 1934-38 : mb. deput. first Nat- ional Cabinet on Boroughs Ordinance, 1924, member several other deputations; trustee, Juma Mosque Trust; accompd. Kunwar Sir Maharaj Singh and family on their Rhodesian tour, 1934; Provin- cial Chairman, All-India Meman Ad- vancement Conference. In India served as an officer in the Bombay City Vol- unteer Corps, during Muslim - Hindu riots, 1929. Recreation : Swimming, member of the Indtan Surf Life Saving Club. Clubs : Porbandar State Club (in India). address: 136, Commercial Road, Durban, Natal. 1903, educ. Indian Higher Grade 6, Porbandar, about 1800, died in 1895. Was for some time Prime Minister firm of M, H. Cassim & Son, direct imprs. Public actyva.: Ex jt. hon. sec. Orient Club, 1931; jt. hon, treasurer, Orient Club; cte. nb, N.LC.: trustee, Juma Masjid Trust since 1925; also act. chairman of the trust board; donated, jointly with brothers, the Pathan School building. Booth Rd. May- ville; S.A.L.C. deputation mb. before the Miniater of the Interior on segregation pro- posals. 1939: repst. Natal at $.A.I.C. Conference at Johan- Nesburg, 1930: repstd. Natal at the Meman Conference in Jamnagar, 1933. Clubs: Orient, Durban. (In India) The Machonocie Porbandar State Club. Visited India, 1924, 1927 and 1932. Address: 138, Commercial Rd., Durban. School, Durban; sm. d@. of O. H. A. (Dewan) of the State of Porbandar and also acted as Regent in the absence Jhaveri, ex-presdt., S.A.1.C. Came of the Rana Sahib, 1872. Highly respected in the State by the authorities, both Indian and British. He was thanked by the British Government for his services and hospitality to its officials. For his services to the State, his descencants enjoy special privileges on State occasions. ISMAIL Moosa; y. 5. of late Moosa Hajee Cassim ; b, Durban, May 7, 1910; educ. Carlisle Street Govern- ment Indian School and Marine College; om. Aysa, o. d. of Hajee Ismail Aboo- baker Jhaveri, of Durban. A keen sportsman, playing football, tennis and cricket. Member, Ozone Club, Durban North. Made several visits to India. V.-presdt., Muslim C.C. and Stars F.C. Trustee, Hajee Cassim Moosa Chari- table Trust. Address: 136, Commercial Rd., Durban.

---

## Page 9

224 THE SOUTH AFRIC SEEDAT, Ebrahim Suliman, merchant; 6. Degam, dist. Surat, 1908; 2nd s. of Suli- man Essop Seedat: ones. ; educ. Johannes- burg. Came to South Africa in 1917, stayed with father in Jo- hannesburg. Was man- ager of Turffontein Silk Bazaar (Adam Seedat & Co.) in 1932. In 1937 became sole director of the Turf- fontein: Silk Bazaar (Pty.), Ltd. Address : 35, Turf Club Street, Phone 32-2160, Turf- fontein, Johannesburg, SEEDAT, Goolam Mahomed Dawood, merchant; 6. Stanger, Feb. 10, 1906; 0. s. of late D. M. Seedat, for- merly merchant of Durban ; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban. On leaving school, entered father’s business. On latter’s death took con- trol of his business interests; trading as D. M. Seedat & Co., general wholesale and sugar merchants. Public activities : Interested in all matters affecting the Indian community. Ozone and Orient. Address: (Res.) 40, Gladys Road, Transvaal. Club : Phone 3-6157. (Bus.) 48, Queen Street, Phone 2-2257, Tel. ad., “Seedat,” Durban, Natal. SEEDAT, Hajee Mahomed Ebrahim; merchant; 6. Surat city, India, 1872. Came to South Africa in 1894, settled down in Ladysmith. In 1900 opened business in th= firm name of Ismail Moosajee, Ladysmith. After 10 years’ activities, changed the firm name to Ismail Mahomed & Co., with brother I. E. Seedat as partner. Has large landed property interests in this area. Public activities : Once had occupied a number of important public positions, has now prac- AN INDIAN WHO’S WHO tically retired from public work. A large donor to the Sastri College Building Fund. Is one of the leading and highly esteemed residents of Ladysmith and district. Addvess : Ismait Mahomed & Co., 290-294, Murchison St., P.O. Box 94, Phone 92, Ladysmith, Natal. SEEDAT, Kassim Mohamed, M.R.C.S. (England), L.R.C.P. (Lond.); 5. Newcastle, Natal, 1897: educ. Newcastle Convent School, Bombay Uni- versity and London; married d. of Mahomed Ebrahim. Started practice in Durban in 1930. Public activities : While interested in all matters affecting the Indian community is unable, owing to the nature of his work, to take any prominent part. Was v.-presdt. and then chairman of the Ozone Club, Durban North? Divisional Surgeon St, John Ambulance Assocn- (Indian Brigade). Keen on all sports, being an official of many clubs, Clubs : Orient and Ozone. Address : 173, Grey St., Phone 2-4215. (Res.) 73, North St., Phone 2-0906, Durban, Natal. SEEDAT, Mahomed Ismail; a son of Ismail Ebrahim Seedat; 6. Ladysmith, Dec., 1901 ; educ. Ladysmith and Toorawa School, Surat, On leaving school was in private employment. Now prominently connected with the firm of Ismail Mahomed & Co. Public activities : Member, Muslim Library; ac- tively associated with sport, repstd. Natal in South African foot- ball tournament, 1926 ; repstd. Klip River in inter-town soccer and cricket: presdt,, Ottoman F.C, and C.C. and its captain for many years ; founda- tion member and_v.-captain, Mercantile Tennis Club. Address : 304, Murchison St., Phone 92, Ladysmith, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 225 THE SEETHAL FAMILY 9 6 969 tp ae 69 pe ph Sp pm ps phy ane 6 Alan A nae St dae S “ane GA 6 pita dp Atoane peta Pe an ed os ate to pm etm sem peas pA SA SOE FE Se $s SES an iS Hi 9 Sn A 8 ft S$ 9 WILLIAM Silas Seethal ; life assurance consultant; 6. Bulwer, Natal, Jan. 17, 1895; e¢. s. of Isreal Seethal ; m. Anna Mercia, 2d d. of late J. Ephraim; three s., fourd.; educ. Railway Govt Aided School, Maritzburg and St. Aidan’s Provincial Training College, Natal Indian Teachers’ Junior Certificate, 1914, Senior Certificate, 1916. Joined teaching profession 1907, first on teaching staff of Sutherlands Indian School, promoted headmaster of same school, 1916. Transferred as principal to St. Aidan’s Indian Boys’ School, March 1923. Resigned April, 1938, on appointed superintendent for Indian business, Natal, by the National Mutual Life Asscn. of Australasia, Ltd., which firm he had previously represented since 1925 as agent. Public activities: Was member of the Anglican Diocesan Board ; lay representative of the Elective Assembly for Natal; Lay representative to Natal Synod, 1939 and two previous occasions ; asst. secty. of the Anglican Church Council, Durban ; was member on several previous occasions ; member of the-Christ Church Council; was licensed lay reader; presdt. and life v.-presdt., 1938, treasurer for 7 years and foundation member of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society; member of the Natal Indian Congress (now N.LA.) ; takes a prominent part in the public life of the Indian community. Address; (Res.) ‘‘Silvercreek,”’ 168, Kenilworth Road, Phone 8-8749 ; (Bus.) 6, 7 and 8, Solomon’s Buildings, 356, Pine Street, T.A.‘“Silvanus,” Durban, Natal. ‘GLADSTONE Reuben Seethal ; insurance agent; 8. Plessilaer, Pietermaritzburg, Oct. 9, 1916. ¢. s. of William Silas Seethal ; educ. Sastri College, Durban, matriculated, 1937. On leaving college joined the National Mutual Life Association of A. Ltd., working under his father. Public activities : Hon. secty., Christ Church Building Fund. Member of the Christ Church Council; member of the Natal Indian Congress. Keen on all Indian public activities. Recreation; Sport. Address: ‘‘Silvercreek,” 168, Kenilworth Road, Phone 8-8749; (Bus.) 6-7-8, Solomon’s Build- ings, 356, Pine Street, Phone 2-1566, Durban, Natal. ANNA Mercia Seethal; 8. Durban, April 5, 1896; 2nd d. of late Jeremiah Ephraim, former schoolmaster of Isipingo ; m. William Silas Seethal, Dec. 29, 1915; three s., four d.; educ. St. Aidan’s Govt.-aided School, Durban. On leaving school took up teaching until her marriage. Public activities : member of the Christ Church Council on several occasions ; member of the Christ Church Mothers’ Union; member of the Natal Indian Congress; member of the Indian Women’s Asscn; member of the Indian Child Welfare Society; takes part in all social and public ‘activities of the Indian community. Address : ‘‘Silvercreek,’’ 168, Kenilworth Road, Phone 8-8749, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 10

226 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SEEDAT, Moosa Ebrahim, merchant ; b. Alipore, dest. Surat, 1898; ¢. s. of late Ebrahim J. Seedat; one d.; educ. Alipore, Degum and Chhikly. Came to South Africa in 1910, settled with father at Germiston. After a while was book- keeper with the firm of Ismail, Suleman & Co., leading Indian merchants. Then started as public book- keeper» in Johannes- burg. also conducted business in partnership since 1923. Since 1931 engaged in own business as general merchant and also continued bookkeeping business; trading as M. T. Seedat & Co. Public activihes - Former secty., Madressa Himayet Islam of Johannesburg; committee member of the Trans- vaal Indian Congress and Muslim Assocn.; auditor C. and T. Muslim League. 4ddress : 142, High Street, Phone 32-2140, P.O. Box 710, Turffontein, Johannes- burg, Transvaal. SEETHAL, Philip Michael; 06. Polela, Natal, Jan. 21, 1900; ed, Sutherlands and St. Aidan’s Boys’ School, Sydenham and Teachers’ Training Classes, Dur- ban. Passed Indian Teachers’ Senior Cer- tificate Exam. and the Natal Education Dept. T.4; m. only 2. of the late A. F. Peters, of Pietermaritzburg ; Id. 3s. First appointed on the teaching staff of the Sydenham Boys’ School, 1915. Pro- moted head master Lidgetton Indian School, 1919. For many years headmaster of Sutherlands Indian School. Trans- ferred in 1933 to St. Paul’s Indian School, Maritzburg, the fourth largest Government-Aided Indian School in Natal; his services have been highly praised by the Educational authorities. Public services ; v.-chairman, Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, Pietermaritzburg Branch. Takes a keen interest in the Indian public welfare of Sutherlands and district; is particularly interested in the youth movement. One of the Maritzburg Jubilee committee and a member of the sub-committee organising the children’s sports con- nected with the celebrations. Address: (Res.) P.O. Plessislaer. (Bus.) St. Paul's Government-Aided School, 559, Longmarket St., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. SETH Hassaram Rijhoomal, banker, merchant ; 6. Hydera- bad, Sind, 1876. Ar- tived in South Africa in 1896, settled in Durban. After trading for many years, started the Bombay Bazaar in 1905. In 1915 left the Union and started business in India, China, and Japan, opening branches in Bombay. Calcutta, Madras, Hong-Kong, Shanghai and Yoko- hama. In Durban the business is being con- ducted in turns by his sons and partners, Gobindram Hassaram, Kishinchand Hassaram, Ramchand Hassa- ram and Gulabrai Viroomal. Revisited the Union with his family in 1930. Has business ability of the highest order. Public actiwties ; A director of the Hyderabad Electric Supply ; councillor of the Hydera- bad Municipality in 1925; honorary magistrate Hyderabad Sind, and has held other public offices. Well known for his charitable acts. Address: (In India) Seth Hassaram Rijhoomal, Shahi Bazaar, Hyderabad, Sind. (In the Union) The Bombay Bazaar Co. (Pty.), Ltd., P.O. Box 2222, 505/7, West Street, Durban, Natal. SEWDUTH, Chat- wan; 6. Durban, Oct. 31, 1897; edue. Dur- ban. On leaving school engaged in private em- ployment. Started own business, opening first passenger bus service on the North Coast. Later started an up- to-date passenger transportation between Durban and Matritz- burg. Now proprietor of Woodvilla Service Station. Public actiyi- fies; Treas. and a foundation member of the Avondale Hindu Benevolent Society; patron, Durban Indian Golf Club (donor of the Sewduth Golf Trophy); patron, Stamford Hill Educational and Social Society; an official of various other football and cricket clubs. Recreation ; Golf. Address > (Res.) 97, Woodford Grove. (Bus.) 67, Leopold Street, Phone 2-4867, Durban, Natal. SHAIKH, Hajee Ah- med Ebrahim; 6. Ladysmith, 1903 ; educ. Natal. Well known in South .\frican Indian commercial circles. Ac- tively interested in public affairs, member of Natal Indian Con- gress, repstd. Province at various S.A.1.C. Conferences at Cape Town, Kimberley, Jo- hannesburg, etc. Com- mittee member and one of the foundation members of the Mus- lim Club, Durban, now amalgamated with the Orient Club, Isipingo. Sport: Tennis. V.-presdt. and captain of the Moonlighters Tennis Club, one of the pioneer Indian Clubs. First club to arrange a tour of the Transvaal, 1935; presdt., N.I.L.T.A. joint secty.. N.LC., 1939; joint treasurer, N ot Commissioner af Oaths, 1939. Made pilgrimage t Mecca, 1937. dddress: (Res.) 75, North Street, Phone 2-4306. (Bus.) 46a, Queen Street, Phone 2-0077, Durban, Natal. ++ SHAIKH, Hajee Ismail Ahmed ; ©. ». of late A. M. Shaikh; a pioneer Indian mer- chant; &. Wathor, India, 1900; educ. Higher Grade Govern- ment Inctian Schoel. On leaving school en- tered father’s business, becoming proprietor in 1920 of A. M. Shaikh, wholesale merchants, Durban. Public acti fics: Foundation mem- her of the Musthim Club; treas. of various char- itable institutions ; member of the N.1.C. ; and is a generous donor to all public funds. Made pilgrimage to Mecca in 1932. Club: Orient. Address: (Res.) Cr, Old Dutch Rd. and Lansdell Avenue, Phone 4-6510. (Bus.) 46. Queen Street, Box 831, Phone 2-4630. Tel. add.: ‘‘Amshaikh,’’ Durban, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO SHAIKMODEEN (also known as S, Mohideen}), cane planter ; b. Fairbreeze, Maidstone, Feb. 10, 1909; 0. s. of late Raj Mohamed; m. ¢. d@, of A. Katrim, of Bellair, one s., three d. ; educ. Fairbreeze Indian School, Maidstone. After leaving school, joined father’s business of general dealer in 1924 Trading as Mzimuga Trading Co. After father's cteath, took up cane farming in 1928, which he has greatly developed. Farms at Fairbreeze, Frasers and Groutville. Public activities ; Secty. of Fairbreeze School F.C.; trustee, Fairbreeze [ndian School Committee; secty., Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assocn., 1936-37; chairman, Tongaat Indian Mill Group; chairman, Fairbreeze [ndian Sporting Club ; v.-presdt., Natal Indian Congress (Tongaat Branch) ; secty., Habeebiah Moslem Society, Tongaat; delegate Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assocn. interviewed the Minister of Agriculture at Cape Town, 1938: v.- presdt., Lower Tugela and District Child Welfare Society. Interested in all other local public activities. Recreation ; Football, tennis and angling. Address > P.O. Box 4, Maidstone, Natal. SHAM Sewshanker; b. Verulam, Oct. 17, 1896; 4th s. of late Sham Sidar, a pioneer Natal settler; edue. Verulam and private study, taking pro- fessional qualification Indian Teachers’ Senior Certificate. Joined the teaching profession in 1913, being appointed as assistant at the Vetulam School, pro- moted headmaster of the Umhloti School, 1920. A keen sports man, repstd. Durban and North Coast in inter-District cricket om several occasions. Toured India as a member of the first South African Indian Sporting contingent. Life v.-presdt., N.C.I.ELA.: presdt,, Verulam T.C,; council member, Natal Indian Lawn Tennis Assocn.; former council member, Natal Indian Teachers’ Society. J.ife patron and one of the founders of the Verulam Dipavati Sports Union ; patron, Verulam Temple C.C.; trustee, Verulam Hindu Crematorium; v.-presdt., N.LA. (Verulam Branch); v.-presdt., Verulam Child Welfare Society ; member of the General Council of the Natal Indian Sugar Growers’ Association. Hobbies ; Motoring and farming. Address; P.O. Verulam, Natal.

---

## Page 11

SHEIK AMEER, Hajee ; b. Durban, 1878; educ. Durban. First started business at Dannhauser. At the outbreak of the Boer War went back to Durban. Returned after peace declaration, resuming business at Dannhauser. Once the business had been de- veloped to the largest in the northern dis- tricts. Later on re- ‘stricted business ac- tivities, became con- nected with other interests and also acted as interpreter at Newcastle, Public activities : Always has taken a leading part in the public life of the northern districts of Natal. Member of the N.I.C. (Dannhauser Branch) ; v.-presdt., Dannhauser Indian School Management Board ; took part in the Passive Resistance movement, 1913. Went on pilgrimage to Mecca, 1935. Address: P.O. Box 4, Phone 14, Dannhauser, Natal. SHEIK, Emam, school pringipal; — 6. Escombe, Natal, May 16, 1905; 4th s. of late Santha Saib; m.d. of Jahangir Khan, of Durban Road, May- ville, one s., two d.; educ. Carlisle Street Indian Govt. School, Durban. On leaving school joined the teach- ing staff of Malvern Govt. Indian Aided School for seven years, afterwards Sea View for nine years. Pro- moted headmaster at Hill View, 1937, trans- ferred to Chatsworth, 1938, as principal. Public activities : Committee member, Malvern Islamic Madressa; presdt. of the Durban-Second Malvern Rover Scouts’ Crew; v.-presdt., Natal Indian Boy Scouts’ Assocn.; member, Malvern Indian School Sports Committee; hon. auditor, Clare Estate Hill View Indian School Building Committee; v.-presdt., Pinetown and Suburban Indian Schools’ Sports Assocn. Address: P.O. Escombe, Natal. 228 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO SHREEF, Mahomed, merchant; 6. Shrivar- dhan, disf. ‘Koboba, India, 1887; 0. s. of late Goolam Ahmed Dawray; 7., two s., five d.; educ. Govt. School, Bombay. Came to South Africa in 1902; spent one year in Kimberley, two years in Mafeking, eventually settled in Vryburg. Started own business as general merchants in 1914, with which is still connected; trad- ing as M. Shreef & Co., general merchants. Public activities ; Chairman of the Indian Muslim Mosque; member of the Coloured School Committee, for many years. Prominently associated with all Indian public work. Acts as interpreter to the local magistrate’s court and immigration matters without any remuneration. Shows practical support to all sports; gave ground for tennis purposes. Address : P.O, Box 36, Market Street, Vryburg, Cape Province. SIGAMONEY, Bernard L. E.; minister of the Church of South Africa ; 6. Durban ; educ. Durban and England. [Former principal, St. Aidan'’s Boy's School, Sydenham, Durban; now school principal in Johannesburg. Held important official positions in public and sports activities. Address < 18, Mosley St, Doornfontein, Johannesburg, Transvaal. SINGH, Babu Tala- want; 6. Fyzabad, India ; educ, Fyzabad ; s. of Surnam Singh. Arrived in Natal in 1877. After the com- pletion of the period of employment, started own business at Veru- lam in 1896. Was also a large cane farmer in the district. Public activities Chairman, trustee, has been a member of Shri Gopal- lal Temple at Verulam ever since its inception; member of Natal In- dian Congress ; served as an official representing Verulam on various public occasions; delegate to S.A.LLC. at Cape Town Con- ference; served in the Boer War with Indian Am- bulance Corps. organised by Mr. M. K. Gandhi; retired from active business, December, 1931; law abiding and philanthropic, and is popular among all sections of the community. Address : P.O. Box 3, Verulam, Natal. ed i SINGH, Brijlall; s. of Bhoola Singh; 6 Richmond, 1880 ; vate. private study. On leaving school was in private employment. Jn 1914 started own business of Commercial Cartage Co.; in 1930 commenced business of general dealers, which is now closed. Public achiwities : Member of the Natal Indian Con- gress; member of the Cato Manor School. Interested in all public work affecting the South African Indians, Address ; (Res.) 40, Bellair Road. (Bus.) 126, Com- mercial Road, Phone 2-4030, Durban, Natal. SINGH, Bhoola Basdaw, merchant ; & Richmond, Natal, 1892; 2nd s. of late Bhoola Singh ; one d. ; educ. Private. Started own business as general dealer, 1924. Trading as Commercial Produce Supply Co. Public ac- tivities : Takes an in- terest in all matters affecting the Indian community. Address : (Res.) 98, Wiggan’s Road. (Bus.) 16 Cross Street, Phone 2-4981, Durban, Natal. 15 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 229 (Pm tae sm pam ee mS pe 5 a a SP SF Be 6 te eB 5 ae St § tee CBe F — EY BHOOLA SINGH FAMILY 5m 6 pt 69 ne 6 ae FO Se A be A 8 Oe Olé 2 eb 1B Fe SB SB A Se A5 8 pee mcr me SINGH, Sookdeo Bhullun, merchant: b&. Richmond, Natal, June 1, 1898; 3rd s. of late Bhoolt (Bhullun) Singh ; a. d. of Bhag- aratiSingh, of Durban, two s., five di: edits. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School. After a period of employment when held responsible positions, entered busi- ness, Starting with the late B. M. Singh, Singh’s Mutton Market, and Singh’s Cash Butchery, first such enterprise among Hindu Colonials. Has several branches. Now taken over the business. Public activitics \V.-presdt., Natal Indian Assocn.; trustee of the Aryan Benevolent Home; trustee of the Hindu Crematorium, Mayville; trustee of the Aryan Temple, etc.: patron of ‘the Sydenham Lawn Tennis Club; v.-presdt.. Pirates I.C., holds several other official positions—sports and general Recreation : Tennis. 4ddress > (Res.) The "Castle, Mayville, Phone 8-8974. (Bus.) Head Othce: 133° Warwick Avenue, Phone 2-1730 and extension: 573 Main Road, Clairwood, Phone 8-1437; Singh's Cash Butchery, 143/4 Indian Market, Phone 2-59LO Durban, Natal. SINGH, Bhoola Lutchman, cartage contractor; 6. Rich- mond, Natal, 1903; 4th s. of late Bhoola Singh, formerly of Richmond; mm. d. of late Madhoo Singh, formerly of Cato Manor, three s., one @.; educ. Durban. Started own business as cartage con- tractor in 1921. Trad- ing as City Transport Co. Public activities : Keenly interested in all Indian public affairs. Address: (Res.) 341, Bellair Road. (Bus.} 76, Madressa Arcade, Phone 2-3004, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 12

SINGH, Chuni Har- dew ; 6. Padu, Hatras, United Province, April 21, 1875; educ. Private study. Came to South Africa in 1881, first in private employment in the Richmond district. Since 1887 has been permanently residing in Sutherlands. One time was a member, with the rank of police- sergeant, in the Natal Police, resigned to start. general dealers’ busi- ness at Sutherlands. Traded till 1926, since retired. Also a large property owner, Public activities: Patron of the M.D.1.F.A. for many years, also donor of the Hardew Singh’s Floating Trophy ; was patron of the D.D.I.F.A.; former chairman of the Sutherlands Veda Dharma Sabha ; former official of the Veda Dharma Sabha of Maritzburg, during the time of Swami Shankeranand ; patron of the Pentrich Parcharani Sabha; patron of the Plessislaer Arya Samaj, patron of the Plessislaer Indian Tennis Club; was presdt. of the S.A. Hindi Literary Conference at Pietermaritzburg in 1917; repstd. Indian community on the Edendale Settlement Advisory Board appointed by the trustees; v.-presdt., N.1EA. (M.), 1940; official of several other societies. Address : P.O. Plessislaer, Maritzburg, Natal. SINGH, Gokul Rambuli; 98. Inanda District, about 1880; educ. Wurban. Was formerly a photo- grapher by profession and for Many years a legal clerk : now has retired, Public acitvr- fies : Since retirement devotes all his time to public work; is an honorary teacher at Pentrich und Maritz- burg Hindi schools. Was presdt., sectv., Shree Vishnu Temple ; was presdt., treas., now v.-presdt., Veda . Dhrama Sabha; presdt., Vedic Vidva Parceharak Sabha ; is also a trustee of all three institutions; was a keen sportsman, played cricket and football, repstd. P.M.B. as well as Natal in intertown matches; captained several of the intertown teams, A member of the first Natal football and cricket teams to play in, the Transvaal; was capt. of the Royals F.C. for many years and played cricket for M.I.C.C., one of the best individual teams in the country and during the 1903 tour to the Transvaal had never lost a match. Before becoming a photographer was a teacher at St. Paul’s School, P.M.B. Address: 424, Topham Rd., Pietermaritzburg, Natal. 230 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO SINGH, Bareyam; 6. Dhada, Punjab, Oct. 15, 1878. Joined Army, 22nd P.I. at Punjab, 1895. Saw active ser- vice on the Frontier, Tierra and Malakund ; decorated for services 1897-1898. Engaged in Frontier warfare, returned home and sailed for South Africa in [901 ; #. Catherine, @. of Adam Stein, Swellendam; two d., one s. Settled in Cape Town. In 1904 founded grain and produce busi- ness in which he is en- gaged. Later extended his interests to land and estate business, in which his enterprises have been very successful. Is to-day one of the largest Indian pro- perty owners in Cape Town. Public work : Chairman, Reception Committee of the first session S.A.I.C., 1919; v..chairman, Cape British Indian Council, 1917; chairman, 1927-28, during the condonation agitation, of the Indian National Assocn. of Cape Province; v.-presdt., S.A.I.C. Interested in public efforts directed towards the improvement of the community. Has always generously contributed to public bodies and given freely to charities' and is highly respected by the various sections of the com- munity. His home has on several occasions been placed at the disposal of the Agents-General of the Government of India. Acted as host to Manmohan Singh when the distinguished Indian airman visited Cape Town. — Reercation : Billiards, chess and gardening. Address + (Res.) ‘‘Vryheid,” Princess Street, Walmer Estate, Cape Town, Phone 53-2115. (Bus.) 16, Reform Street, Phone 2-0938, Cape Town. SINGH, Jangbha- door Bahadur Doo- kee; b. Coedmore, Bella, April, 1902: educ. St. Aidan’s School, Cato Manor, Durban. For many years in private em- ployment with Amod Bavat, Maritzburg ; in 1930 started own busi- ness of J. B. Singh’s | | Agency, broker and agent, also Indian re- presentative of several a leading European ‘ wholesale firms. Pubéic ; se activities : Interested d ale in all public work af- fecting the Indian community. Address ; Vedic Road, Phone 3004. (Bus.) 92, Church Street, Phone 2458, Maritzburg, Natal. = SINGH, Kylas Bhoola; 6. Durban, March 31, 1901; 2nd d. of Chatoogoon Sing ; m. Bhoola Singh, e. s. of late Rangit Singh, formerly of Durban, three s., seven d. ; edutc, private tuition. Con- ducts her own business as fresh produce clealer, trading in her own name of K. B. Singh. Public activities : Member, Natal Indian Congress ; Member, Durban Indian Women’s Assocn. ; keenly interested in female education. Visited India 1937, staying for a year. Address : (Res.} 164-166, Sarnia Road. (Bus.) 144, Sarnia Road, Rossburgh, Natal. SINGH, Madhoo; >. India, 1868; s. of late Rajpa Singh. After completing his term of employment, started cane farming, being one of the pioneer Indian farmers of Verulam. Is one of the leading farmers in this district. Public activities ; Took part in the Indian Strike of 1913, under Mr. Gandhi. An advocate of religious and social advancement, being a trustee of the Shree Gopallal Hindu Temple. A liberal sub- scriber to any public movement directed towards the welfare of the community. Visited India in 1907 and 1923. Address ; P.O, Verulam, Natal SINGH, Nursingh Khadarisingh, general merchant and garage proprietor; 6. New- castle, Natal, Aug. 3, 1908; «. s. of late Khadarisingh ; om. d. of Amichand Majles Singh, of Richmond, three s.; educ. St. Oswald Govt. Aided School, Newcastle. Started own business as dealer in used cars, 1936. Opened general dealer’s business, 1937, trading as Singh’s Cash Bazaar. Postal agent for Lennoxton and Fairleigh. Public activities : Interested in all Indian public affairs. A generous giver to all cleserving appeals. Address: Phone 89, P.O. Lennoxton, Newcastle, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 231 SINGH, Oudaraj Raghoonath ; o, s. of Raghoonath Singh; 6. Ladysmith, Sept. 10, 1910; #. Dhanwanti, Sth d. of A. Majles Sing, Richmond; edue. Lady- smith. On leaving school joined father’s business, with which he is now connected. Public work : v.-presdt. and former secty., Arya Samaj, Ladysmith ; v.-presdt., Schools F.C.; one of the founders of tne S.A.R.C.C.; a member of the N.C. Keenly interested in all move- ments concerning the community. Hobby - Motoring and sport. Address: 31, Iling Rd., Phone 109, Ladysmith, Natal. SINGH, Raghoonath; 6b. Malama, Hilsa, Patna, 1872. In 1890 came to Natal, where he joined the Natal Government Railways, promoted chief sirdar and was a railway con- ductor at Ladysmith. Visited India in 1910, and on return resigned from railway service and started own business as general dealer. Public work ; Vhis dates from 1910; during passive resistance movement, 1913, was at the head of the strikers in the Northern Districts; prominent member and official of the N.I.C. and repsd. Natal at S.A.I.C. Conferences held at various Union centres; repsd. South Africa at the All-India National Congress Session at Madras, 1927-28. A stalwart of Arya Samaj in the Union, founding the Ladysmith branch, 1916, being presdt. for 9 years; one of its trustees and treus. since formation, Organised first Hindu Literary Conference held at Ladysmith, 1916; repsd. South Africa at Aryan League Conference at Delhi, 1927 ; a preacher, trustee and v.-presdt., Arya Prithnidi Sabha ; chairman and founder of the governing board of the Putnispruit Government-Aided School; presided at the Vedic Conference and Swami Dayanand Centenary Celebra- tions at Durban; a founder of the K.R.D.LF.A. and an official of a number of sports clubs. A donor to the Sastri College Building Fund. A Commissioner foz Oaths, 1935. Addvess: 31, IWing Rd., Phone 109 Ladysmith, Natal, ‘

---

## Page 13

232 THE SOUTH AFRICAN SINGH, Padam Bharat; 6&. Pieter- maritzburg ; educ. Higher Grade Govern- ment Indian School, Maritzburg; n.d. of C. Hardew Singh, of Plessislaer. On leaving school was in private employment. Settled in India for a while, was connected wrth the Government Audit Dept. at Warachi, Re- turned to South Africa in (927, worked at Edendale. Since 1932 in Durban, where started business of Singh’s Cale. Public activities - A prominent com- mittee member of South African Colonial-Born and Settlers’ [Indian Assocn., or whose behalf investigated the conditions of Indian repatriates in Incha tn 1934, Jn Sport: On behalf of the S.A.I.F.A., negotiated the tour of the All-India Soccer Team with the Calcutta Assocn. ; was one of the umpires of the M.C.C. against Karachi at Karacht; was an official of the N.P.L.F.A, now amalgamated with the N.I.F.A. Holds many other positions in sport and public life of the com- munity. Accompanied the Baroda Girl Guides through- out their tour of the Union and Rhodesia. Joint treas.. N.LLA. Address; (Res.) 477, Currie Rd. (Bus.) 198, Grey St., Durban, Natal. SS eel SINGH, Ramauthar Omar, merchant; 06. Durban, 1898; ¢. s. of Ramauthar Singh; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Pietermaritzburg and self study. On leaving school, in private employment for 21 years, thereafter com- menced own business at 209, Retief Street (storekeeper) ; m. (twice) late ¢. d@. of Sadhoo Singh, and ¢. d. of Lalthar. Public ac- tivities ; Patron, Natalians Football! Club (1931); foundation member and trustee, Arya Samaj; treas., Indian Young Men's Club (1929): committee member, Natal Indian Congress (1933) ; committee member, Colonial Born and Settlers’ Indian Assocn., 1938; prominent worker, Indian Unemploy- ment Committee. Student of Hindi literature and follower of Swami Dayanand Saraswathee. Recreation : Hiking. Address, 394, Boom Street, Maritzburg, Natal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO SINGH, Ravikrishna b. Jan. 1, 1888: only s. of Babu Talawant Singh; ¢dve. Higher Grade Indian Govern- ment Sehool and St. Aidan’s College, Syden- ham On leaving school, joined Mahat- ma Gandhi in the Passive Resistance movement of 1913; served two terms of imprisonment, namely, six weeks and six months On the end of the struggle returned to Verulam, where he joined father’s business and is now engaged in cane farming on an extensive scale. Public activitics ; Chatrman of the Shree Gopallal Temple; treas., Hindu Mintra Mundat; founder of the Verulam Hindu Dramatic Society ; a keen worker in all matters concerning the welfare of Indians. Patron, N.C.D.LF.A.; \.-presdt., Verulam ©.6.C and Verulam [.T.C ; presdt.. NEC. (Verulam Branch) : was presdt., Maidstone Mill Group ; v.-presdt., Natal Indian Cane Growers’ Assocn.. member, non-European Mill Poard. Visited India, 1936, where met Mahatma Gandhi and other leaders; has also extensively travelled the Union. Addycess : P.O. Verulam, Natal. SINGH, 8S. L.;3) 4b. Durban: educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban; wz. e. d. of late G. D. Lalla. Public actwiftes : Secty., South African Colonial- Born and Settlers’ In- dian Assocn.; secty., Sir Kuema Reddi Un- employment Relief Committee; was presdt., Arya Prith- inidi Sabha (Aryan Representative As- sembly) ; was presdt.. Aryan Benevolent Society, Durban; is connected with numer- ous other institutions. Held highest positions in administration of Indian sports ; South African manager of the All-{ndia Football tour, 1934 | former presdt., N.ILF.A., D.D.LLF.A.; — presdt., Natal and Durban Cricket Union ; presdt., Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn. ; council member, S.A.I.E.A.; manager and trainer, Natal Football KI.; held many other official and responsible positions. Hobby - Press contributions on sports in The Natal Daily News. Address ; 40, Garnett Rd., Durban. =) ew eee THE SOUTH AFRICAN SINGH, Jasraj Isherwar, merchant : 6. Benoni, Transvaal, W1l2; 44k s. of late Isherwar Singh ; pr Savatri, c. d. of Babu Santha Singh, of Ger- niston ; edtc. Benon. Started own business at Benoni in 1930, as wholesale fruiterer, trading in own name, also. property owner. Public activities * In India (If 9) took part in non-coaperation movement in Punjab ; was sentenced to im- prisonment for three weeks; also took part in other Congress activities in India. IKeen supporter of sports; \.-presdt., Benoni Thistle F.C. dddress 212, Third Avenue, Phone 1309, Benoni, Transvaal. SINGH, Jung Bahadur, merchant tailor; &. Johannes- burg, 1900; v. s. of late Beharie Singh ; m.o d. of late Babulall Maharaj, formerly of Pretoria, five s., two > duc. St Aidan’s Aided School, Durban. Came to the Transvaal, when joined brother in business at Germiston. Since 1922 resident in [retoria, where started business as merchant tailor. Trading as J. B. Singh. Had a branch at Steel- works, Pretoria, now closed 9 dddiess : Street, Phone 3102, Pretoria, Transvaal. 298, Boom SOMA Vallabh ; pb. Matavad, dis’. Surat, 1900; cduc. Matavad. Came to South Africa 1912, setticd at Jo- hannesburg. First in employment; later started own business as merchant tailor, first in Johannesburg, now in Jeppe. Public ac- ttorties - Treas., Koli Hitvardhak Mundal ; secty., Transvaal In- dian Tailor Employers’ Assocn. [n 1929 during the civil disobedience movement, led by Mr. Gandhi, acted as treas. of the fund to aid the movement in Jalalpur. -ddress : 307, Commissioner Street, Jeppe, Phone 24-1844, Johannesburg, Transvaal. INDIAN WHO'S WHO 233 SONNE, Kalanjee Pursotham ; 6. Kurel Supa; dist. Navasari, 1879. Came to South Africa in 1902, first stayed in Cape Town. after two years’ resi- dence in Vryburg, where started gencral dealer's business, went to Grahamstown, in 1907, where opened business as general dealer; he is propne- tor of the African Laundry, In India follows the occupation of a goldsmith and farmer. Public work + Was chairman of the British Indian Assocn., Grahams- town, and has been prommentiy connected, since the commencement of his stay, with the public work of the city. Address : 2, Cobden St, Phone 367, Grahamstown, Cape Province. {In India) Kurel Supa, Post Munsad, via Navasari, Bombay, India. SOOBIAH, Joe; 5b. Estcourt. Feb. 29. 1888: educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Maritz- burg; ar. Govindamah, @. of Sinnapa Pillay. On leaving school en- gaged in market busi- ness, which is a highly successful concern. Is a large property owner, Public actrutties 3 Former presdt., Maritz- burg Indian Voters’ Assocn., taking part in election of candi- dates : was presdlt., Siva Soobramonier and Marnieaman Temples ; presdt., Colonial-Born Indian Assocn., was secty., N.LC. (P.M.Burg. Branch): first vecty.. H.¥.M.A.; Nata! delegate to the S.A I.C Conference in Johannes- burg. 1925; prominent worker during the Indion strike of 1913, being chairman of the contro!ling committee, gave much useful information to the Paddison Deputation in Maritzburg, 1926, and was one of those responsible for its entertainment during its visit. Keenly interested in higher education for Indians, he himself has four sons at Lovedale, which is the highest number coming from any one family. As youth was fond of sports, winning many trophies for long distance and track cycle racing ; played soccer and cricket, keen on boxing. Was the first Indian who was requisitioned to stand as City Councillor for Pietermaritzburg, 1938, but owing to the centenary celebrations withdrew candidature. dddress : (Res.) 451, Pretermaritz St., Phone 3750. (Bus.) Municipal Market, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. ,

---

## Page 14

234 THE SONI, Mooljee Hirjee, merchant jeweller ; 6. Gedbagas- ra, Kathiwar, 1905; ¢. s. of late Soni Hirjee Ramjee; educ. Ged- bagasra. Came to South Africa in 1918, settled with parents in Durban. Started own business as merchant jeweller in 1926. Trad- ing in own name. Public activitres : Secty., Girnara Soni Gnathi Hitvarthak Mundal; member, Natal Indian Assocn. and takes an interest in all Indian matters. Address: 169, Grey St., Durban SOOBRAMONEY, Kannee, general agent ; 6. Pictermaritz- burg, Sept., 1916 ; edie. York Road Govern- ment Indian School, Maritzburg. Public ac- tivities - Started public career at age of 16. Organising sectv., S.A. Colonial Born and Settlers’ Assocn. ; joint hon, sec., C B. and S. I. Assoc. (Maritzburg Branch), 1933 to 1939 ; committee member, Maritzburg Aryan Benevolent Society ; member, Indo-Euro- pean Joint Council, ex-committee and member, H.Y.M.A.; v.-presdt.. Pentrich Indian Y.M.A.: committee member, Maritzburg Indian Unemployment Relief Committee, 1937; repstd. Maritzburg, Indian Social Service Committee, under chairmanship of the Mayor, on occasion of the Coronation of their Majesties in 1937; one of two consultative members of the Indian community on the Social Services of S.A. (Maritzburg Branch), 1937 and 1938; hing’s Coronation Celebration committee member (Indian section), 1938; appeared on the deputation of the C.B. and S.LA. (Maritzburg Branch), before S.A. Police Commission of Enquiry ; hon, secty., Natat Liquor and Catering Trades Employees’ Union (Maritzburg Branch) ; councillor, M.D.LF.A., 1933— 1938; actg. secty., M.D.I.F.A. in 1937; hon. secty. and treas., Schools F.C. (Maritzburg}, 1936—1938 ; councillor, M.D.E.C.U., 1937 v.-presdt., Natal Indian Youth Council; asst. organising secty., Durban Indian Municipal Employees Society member, Durban Indian Clut assisted in the inauguration of Indian Child Welfare Societies at Verulam, Stanger, Newcastle and Dundee in 1939; appeared with various deputa- tions to Government, Provincial and Municipal authorities; committee member, N.LA. Address : (Res.) Hathorn's Hill, Retief Street Extension, or P.O. Box 264, Maritzburg and C/o Madoline Bldgs., Baker St., or Box 1905, 23 North Street, Durban. AFRICAN SOOKDEO, Alghoo; 6. Durban, April 10, 1886; 9 educ. Higher Grade Government In- dian School ; ». twice, late Sookiah, d. of RB. Rambhroas. Edendale, Natal and late Fanny Ethel, d. of David Ernest, Johannesburg; 4 daughters. Occupa- tion: clerk. Public activines » Prominent member, Natat Indian Congress and attended all sessions of the S.A.1.C. Conference : member of the several welfare bodies. Has held practically every official position in both Natal and South African sport. Presdt., D.D.I.T.A., 1928-31, and N.LP.A., 1932-33, secty., D.D.LF.A., 1926; record clerk, D.D.LF.A. for many years, Was one of those instrumental in forming the Sunday Soccer Assoc., then composed of Mayville and South Coast Junction, afterwards advocating its amalgamation with the N.LE.A. a step which was consummated during his presidency of the N.I.F.A.; another step taken during his period of office was the creation of the Northern Districts Indian F.A. Presented the Sookdeo Shield for competition to the D.D.LTA, (Sunday League). Repstd. D.D.UF.A. on tne N.LV A, Council for many years: moved motion of invitation to the India team to tour South Africa, and was responsible for a good deal of the preliminary publicity work connected with it. Secty. and Treas., S.A.I.I.A., 1926-27, was responsible for its reorganisation on a proper working basis to meet the new conditions of expansion. Connected with cricket administration for the last 23 years. Presdt., N.1.C.U., 1932-33; presdt., D.IL.C.U.,v.-presdt., D L.C.U., 1934-335. Presdt. Durban Indian Golt Club, 1932. v.-presdt., 1933-35. Presdt., Durban Indian Angters Assocn, Secty. of the Durban Indian Sports Ground Assocn., 1925-6-7; at present one of its trustees. Address: (Res.) 47, Keal Rd., Sydenham. (Bus.) Town Clerk's Office, City Hall. Durban. SOOKER, Pranjivan; &. Navasari, 1900; three s., threed. Came to South Africa in 1914, joining his father’s firm of mer- chant tailors. Since 1917 has conducted his own establishment. Opened branch at 25, Small Street, Jo- hannesburg, trading as Devmore Tailoring, in 1938. Public activities : Secty., Transvaal Khatri Society; has contributed to the pub- lic work of his group. Address : 198, Market Street, Johannesburg, Transvaal. SOOMAR, Abdool Cassim, also known as A. K. Cassim, mer- chant; 6. Ranavav, India, 1904: a. s. of Cassim Soomar ;° educ. Ranavavy and Mafe- king. On leaving school joined father’s business. in 1927 took charge of the firm which he is conducting today. Branch store, A.B.C. Bazaar, Station Road, Mafeking. Public ac- fwities Always in- terested in Indian affairs. Keen on travelling, made several visits overseas. Address : THE P.O. Box 6], Phone 42, Tel ad., ‘‘Soomar,” Mafeking. Cape Province. SOOMAR, Yousuf; b. Ranavav, 1892; 2. s. of late Issa Hajee Soomar; cduc. Bombay; managed the firm's Standerton - business, 1912-14. Member, Is- lam \.odge, Bombay. Clubs: Orient, [sipingo, Durban and Islam, Bombay. Hobby; Read- ing. Add ess < (India), C/o Messrs, Phillips & Co., Chemists, Mayo Rd., Fort, Bombay ; (South Africa), 54, Queen Street, Durban. SULEMAN, Cassim Tayob, merchant; 6. Porbandar, Kathiwar, 1910; 2d ». of Jate Cassim Tayob; m., one @.; educ. Victoria Jubilee Madressa, Por- bandar. Came to South Africa in 1922, settled with parents in Ermelo. Joined father’s busi- ness; siuce father’s death associated with brothers as partner in the business, trading as Cassim Tayob. Public activities: (In India) was member on the Board of the Vic- toria Jubilee Madressa, Porbandar: captain, Ottoman C.C ; captain, Muslim Volunteer Corps ; secty. of the Memon Anjuman Islam. (Io Union) chairman, Ermelo Indian Sporting Club. Keenly interested in sport. Has made several trips to India. Publications - Contributor to the Indian Press (India and South Africa) of short stories and articles. Recreation : Cricket and reading. Address - 45, Naude Street, Phone 103, Tel. ad. “Tayob,”” P.O. Box LOL, Ermelo, Transvaal. SURATWALA, Ganda Ranchod ; 6. Surat, 1900; educ, Surat. Came to South Atrica when a boy, Joined firm of C. B. Gihwala, merchants and tmporters, Cape Town, In 1933 opened own firm of G. R. Siratwala, general merchant and importer, Pubhe work : Member Cape United Hindu Assocn., which body is affiliated to the Cape Indian Congress. _In- terested in all public affairs. Address » 6 Mount Rd., Cape Town. SURTIE, Tayob Noormahomed, also well known as Tyob Surtie, merchant; 6. Sukpur, Jamnagar State, about 1881; educ. Ranavav. Came to South Africa. in 1896, landed at Dur- ban. After a short stay proceeded to Basutoland, where he was among the early Indians ; there he joined the firm of his brother, Ebrahim Noormahomed Surtie, general dealer. In 1909 started own business ; : as general dealer, with which he is still connected, He has developed it into one of the largest Indian businesses in Basutoland, with a chain of branch stores. Public activities ; Chairman of the Basutoland Indian community since 1914, a year later was res- ponsible for getting the deportation order against several Indians in Basutoland cancelled—petittoning, among others, H.E. the Viceroy, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Resident Commissioner and others; as chairman, was responsible for drawing the attention of the Imperial Conferences in 1923 and 1926 to Indian grievances in Basutoland, On behalf of the Indian community, presented addresses to the various notabilities who visited Basutoland, including H.R.H. the Prince of Wales and H.R.H. the Duke of Kent (then Prince George), the various Governors General and Sir Herbert Stanley; has done a great deal to create a friendly understanding between the officials and resident Indians. Is highly respected by Basuto chiefs and people of Basutoland. Address P.O. Butha Buthe, Tel. ad., ‘‘Surtie, Basutoland.

---

## Page 15

236 SUNDRUM, Rev. John Moses, Clerk in Holy Orders ; b. British Guiana, 1887; 4fA s. of late Daniel Sun- drum, formerty of Ma- dras; om. Ruth, 5éh d. of J}. D. V. Mathurav Chettiar, of Maciras, two s., two d.; cduce, Wesley College, Rova- petta, Madras and St. Paul's Theological College, Mauritius, Deacon IDI]. Priest in charge, 1914—20, St. Mary’s Church, Port Louis, Mauritius. Krom 1920-29 Priest in charge, St. Paul’s Church, Pietermaritzburg; from 1920, St. Aidan’s Indian Mission, Durban. Public actiwilies ; Secty. of the Durban Indian Benevolent Society ; former executive of the Indian Child Welfare Society and interested in all social and uplift activities of the Indian community. Addr : 49, Cross Street, Fhone 2-3688, Durban, Natal. : SYED Goolam Habib Hoosen, mer- chant; 6. Alcock Spruit, Natal, 1908; 4th s. of late Syed Hoosen ; educ. St. Oswald's School, New- castle. Since 1921 was in commercial employ- ment. Started own business as general merchant at Alcock Spruit, 1952. trading as Syed Cash Stores. Public activttics : Takes an interest in all public affairs of the Indian community. Played for Ottoman F.C., Ladysmith and Mercantite Recreateon ; Tennis (soccer formerly). P.O. Aleock Spruit, Natal. Tennis Club. wlddvess : Readers ave veferved to Section L1 for addifional names. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO AR Mahomed Ally ; b. jodiya, 1890; four s., four d.; educ. Jodiva and private study Came from India 1903; settled in Dundee, Na- tal. After study in Dundee, joined his father’s business om Dundee. In 1907 wene to Transvaal. In 1909 returned to India on short visit, coming back 1910. Staved mn Lyden- burg, joining father’s business. In {914went to Carolina, where opened his own business as general dealer. Has also a branch store in Carolina. Has been an enterprising business man. Pubhie activities» Secty. and treas., Indian School Board, Carolina; 15 prominent member of ladian community, and has always been actively associated with all matters affecting the Indian community in his district. Is esteemed by ad those with whom he comes in contact. Is keenly interested in religious affairs of Islam. Branch: Carolina J*illing Station and Garage, Showroom, 314. Von Hagen Street ; general stcre and garage, Badplaats (phone 4); furniture dept., 341, Von Hagen Street. Address : P.O. Box 68, Phone 17. Tel. ad., “Tarmahomed,’* Carolina, Transvaal. TALWANTSINGH. {See under “S"). TANDREF, Tommy, shipping agent, . Durban. Was in business as shipping agent in Durban for many years. Is now engaged in business in East Africa. Address PO. Box 134, Mombasa, Kenya, East Africa. TAYOB, Aboo Hajee; wholesale merchant ; 8. Ranavay, Wathiwar, 1900; 27 s. of late Hajee Tayob ; wd. of Hajee Ismail Mohamed Walla, of Pietersburg, fourd. :educ. Ranavav. Came to South Africa in 1912. Engaged in commerce, managing the firm of M. H. Soomar. of Standerton. Opened own business as general dealer in Brits, 1926. Since 1935 in Pretoria as whole- sale, general merchants and direct importers. Trading as A. H. Tayob & Co. Public activities : Takes a keen interest in public affairs of the Indian community. Address 170, Prinsloo Street, P.O. Box 587; Phone 4647, Tel. ad., ‘‘'Tayobco,’’ Pretoria, Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN TAVARIA, Kooverji Jivanji, merchant; J. Navasari City, 1893; 2. s. of late Jivanji Edolji Tavaria; nt. Aimai, 3rd d. of late Dosabhay Sorabjee Bodhanwalla, former merchantofChai Chai, J.ourenco Mar- ques; fours, two d: educ. Sir J J. School, Navasari. Came to South Africa in [910, stayed with father in Johannesburg. In 1912 joined father’s business of general dealer in Johannesburg, the trade name being then changed’to Tavana& Sons. with which is still associated. Branch store at 4, Smal Street, Johannesburg. Also real estate agent; jomed S. E. Sieff & Co., 1936. Publro activities Was executive member for the last 25 years of the T.1.C. {also its former body, T.B.I.A.) ; repstd. Transvaal at various conferences of the S.A.1.C., also member of several deputations. A founder of the International Club and its treasurer; member of the Oriental Club; holds various official positions on sporting bodies, founded the Indian Workers’ Union (1920), also its treasurer (resigned 1924). Did useful work during the influenza cpidemic, 1918. providing nursing accommodation at his own expense. During the visit of Parsi aviators to South Africa met with accident, when collecting funds. Took active part during Vaddison deputation in presenting Incban case. Executive member of the Johannesburg Indian Social Welfare Assocn.; family closely associated with Mahatma Gandhi during his stay in the Transvaal. Well known to Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, acted as private secretary during her trip in the Transvaal. lddress : 224, Market Street, Johannesburg, Transvaal. THAKER, Harilal Ambaram; «. s. of Pandit Ambaram Maharaj; 6. Latipur, Jamnagar State, 1895 ; educ. Shree Daxina Moorti Vidyarthi Bhu- van, Bhavnagar Passed Matriculation of the Bombay Univer- sity, 1913. Came to South Africa in 1914, stayed in Durban, where entered com- mercial career. Started own business as general dealer and direct im- porter in 1923, which is still being conducted by him. Public activities Joint treas. of the Natal Indian Congress, and also of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha; secty. of the Kathiwar Arya Mundal ; repstd. Natal at the S.A.ILC. Emergency Conference, Johannesburg, 1933. 4ddvess : 183, Grey Street, Phone 2-4170. Tel. ad., ‘‘Thaker,’’ Durban, Natal. INDIAN WHOS WHO 237 TAYOB, Hajee Tar Mahomed; 4. Rana- vay, Kathiwar, 1866. Came to South \frica in 1892, landed at Durban ; later pro- ceeded to Pretoria; in 1892 settled at Pieters- burg, where he was a pioneer Indian resictent. In 1895 opened general dealer's business anc subsequently addect wholesale department. Still takes an active interest in the firm of T. M. Tayob, of which he is the proprietor. : Public activities - Trustec, - Pietersburg Mosque (since resigned to proceed to India}. Offered to erect school for Indian children at bis own expense in Pictersburg and has donated liberally to pubhe funds. In India: Member, Victoria Islamic Macdressa ; presdt,, Ranavav Anjuman Islam ; trustee, Kajee Masgid, Ranavav. Landed property owner in Bombay and Pietersburg, in the name of Tayob, Ltd. Address: P.O. Box 66, Phone 77, Pietersburg, ‘Transvaal. THAMBI, Vengatas; Pads. of late H Krish- nasamy . &. Johannes- burg, April, [907; educ. urafrican Nor- mal College, Johannes- burg. Property owner and estate agent: director and secty. of Thambi Bros (ty Ltd. Publee activities : Shared with his late brother, IX. Naran- samy, an active in- terest in the welfare and social work of the Tamil community anct in sporting activitics. Councitior, Melrose Siva Soobramanya Temple, councillor, Transvaal Indian Football Assocn.; councillor, Johannesburg Indian Sports Assocn.; treas., Witwatersrand indian Football Assocn.; treas., Rangers Football Club: treas., Rangers Tennis Club; joint treas, Hindu Sabha School Committee; treas.. Young Men's Vedic Society (Vrededorp) : hon. auditor, Transvaal Tamil Benefit Society ex-secty.. Young Men's Vedic Society (Vrededorp); ex-capt. of Goldfields Cricket Club; capt., Rangers Tennis Club; manager, Witwatersrand Football team against All-India at Johannesburg, 1934. A keen tennis player, has won the Rangers club singles and doubles events. Is also a wholesale fancy goods merchant, trading as K. Thambi in Wiagonal Street. Address : (Res.) 443, Fifteenth Street, Vrededorp. (Bus.) P.O. Box 7480, Diagonal Street, Johannesburg, Transvaal.

---

## Page 16

THUMBADOO, Veerasamy Nagayeah, retired teacher ; b. Durban, Feb. 7, 1882; 2nd s. of late Veera- samy, former Indian interpreter at the office of the Protector of Indian Immigrants; m.s. of Billy Subban, five s.. two d.: educ. Higher Grade Indian School, Durban. On leaving school entered the teaching profession. Retired on pension in 1933. Acted as head- teachér at Victoria Street, Umgeni, Depot Road Govt. Indian Schools on several occasions. Represented Indian teachers before several educational commissions Now representing Humphris-Allen Waverley (Pty.), Ltd., booksellers, Durban. Public achuiies Committee member of the Natal Indian Congress, controls its Educational Sub-Committee ; ex-presdt. of the Natal Indian Teachers’ Society, now life v.-presdt.; chairman and trustee of the Sydenham Hindu Young Men’s Society; offcial of several sporting bodies ; repstd. Durban at cricket on several occasions and Natal at the Barnato Cup tournament at Kimberlev, 1913; captained the first Higher Grade Schools F.C.; secty. of the Crimson League F.C.; among the first Indians to qualify as soccer referee. Was one of the accused to test success- fully the validity of the late hours pass by-law of the Durban Corporation. 4ddress - “'Trichyvilla.” 487, Brickfield Road, Overport, Durban, Natal. TIMOL, Ebrahim Ahmed, merchant ; 8. Kholvad, India, 1900; 3rd s. of late Ahmed Essop Timol; m., two s., seven d.; educ. Kholvad Madressa An- juman Islam. Came to South Africa in 1912, was connected with father’s business at Heidelberg till 1917; thereafter started own business at Nigel, trad- ing as Standard Cycle Works. Public activi- tes : Interested in all public activities affect- ing the Indian com- munity ; member of the Kholvad Club of Johannes- burg. Address: (Res.) 29, Merz Street, Phone 141, Heidelberg. (Bus.) 34, Springs Road, Phone 00901, Nigel, Transvaal. TIMOL, Goolam Hoosen Hajee Ma- homed, merchant; 6. Kholvad, India, June, 1914; ¢. s. of Hajee Mahomed Ahmed Timol; mm. d. of S. M. Desai, of Johannesburg one d.; edie. Muslim University, Aligarh. Came to South Africa in 1915, went back to India with parents. Came back again in 1927. Studied at Govt. School, Johan- nesburg. Proceeded to Aligarh for higher studies in 1931. Stayed two years, returned to South Africa in 1933. After nearly three years’ stay in South Africa went back to India for a little over a year; returned in 1937, joined father's business at Christiana, Transvaal Trading as Ismail Mahomed & Co. Recreation < Cricket. Club: Member of fthe Muslim University Sports Club, of Aligarh. Address : P.O. Box 21, Christiana, Transvaal. TIRY, Sheik Allie ; b. Mahad, dist. Kolaba; educ, Mahad and Uit- enhage. Settled in Uitenhage. Started business in the meat trade, proprietor of Cosmopolitan Butchery, Public activities » Com- mittee member of the Cape British Indian Council, Has taken a prominent part in all matters affecting the Indian community. Is a liberal donor to all deserving movements. Travelled extensively both in India and the Union. Erected at own cost a Muslim School in Caledon Street, Uitenhage.1932. Address : 335, Caledon Street, Phone 161. Tel. ad., “Tiry,” Uitenhage, Cape Province. TIKKLY, Suleman, Commissioner for Oaths; 2nd s. of late Hajee Ismail Tikkly; 0. Kholvad, 1895; educ. Kholvad. Came to South Africa, 1906, joined father’s business in Pietersburg. Later on was with brother. Transferred interests to Zeerust, 1915, joining Ismail Suleman & Co. In 1918 became a partner in the firm of 5S. E. Bhyat & Co. In 1931 became sole proprietor of S. E. Bhyat & Co., Zeerust. Public activities : Treas. of the Zeerust Muslim and Indian community; one of the leading Indians of the district. Address: P.O. Box 77, Phone 17. Tel. ad., ‘‘Bhyat,” Zeerust, Transvaal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 239 OORUEAOLOPEL OALLES ODA RPOLAOOLEPEDIDEDELLEOEDLED EBS BEELODSPEODEDESYELEIOLDEIREDSSEDISEPESELDESEOSLDED LULU OOAEDEPODLUEUOLEEL ELE OELIDALDIDDEYPSELDLIDPREDIE USEDERED ELL BUDELDPUPOLIP LEDS VIELE DS THE TIMOL FAMILY LOLOL UULOUUELEDETOLSAAUUOTOLEAILESIUAUIUAAELUOHELEITEESULEASTSPOUULOLLUDUEDOEOTIUTUO DULYSULOLUEULEDELLTIRTLALTULLEDULED DADS OOAUEUBEVEDULULIUELUIDIDELLOLOLELVSDLOLUATUEUEDI ADEE DAIAN Be iedennsaatstsonter ceeeee ttt tn Jenvennees ATE DAWJEE MAMOOQJEE TIMOL; former merchant; b. Kathor; died Durban, October 22, 1922; ch. 3s 1d. Came to South Africa in 1876, first from India to Mauritius and then to Natal. In 1881 started the business of D. M. Timol. being one of the pioneer Indian merchants to settle in the country. The bustness is still being conducted by his sons. Public activities: While interested in the generat progress of his community, mainly confined his interest to commerce. Died Durban, October 22, £922. HAJEE Mahomed ODawjee Timol; merchant; , Natal, April 15, 1894; e. s. of late Dawjee Mamoojee Timol; m. daughter of Hajee Ahmed Maiter, of Verulam; educ. Govt. Indiau School, and Higher-Grade Govt. Indian School under tate fF. B. E. Conolly. Entered father’s busi- ness; after death of his father took charge of all business interests. also on own account opened tlie Grey St. firm of D. M. Timoi's Sons in partnership with brothers (Amod Dawjee Timol and Ebrahim Dawjee Timol). Public activities: Treas., African Muslim Society; patron. Kismet C. & F.C. and committee member. Natal Muslim Youth Brigade; active member, St. Johu Ambulance Brigade and = Assocn. (Overseas), Natal Division; member, N.LG.. Made a pilgrimage to Becca in 1930. Address (Res.}, 90 Alice St.; (Bus.), 116 Grey St.; Phones 2-3181/2. P.O. Box 211. Durban, Natal. AMOD DOAWJEE TIMOL; merchant, bh. EBRAHIM Dawjee Timol; merchant: b. Durban, August 10, 1905: 3rd son of D. M. Timol; m. daughter of late A. C. Amra, former merchant of Durban: ch., 2 d.; educ. Higher- Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban. On father’s death joined the busi- ness of D. M. Timol & Sons, of which he is a partner. Public activities: First treas. Muslim Youth League; keen on sport: v.-capt. of the Orient Club; member Schools Sports Sec- tion and the T.C., and Stars F.C.; captained Crescent C.C.; travelled extensively in the Union and out- side. Address: 116 Grey St.; P.O. Box 21L; Phones 2-3181/2, Durban Ntl. Durban, Natal, May 25, 1902; 2nd son of late D. M. Timol: m. daughter of late I. B. Timol, formerly merchant of Durban; ch., 2 s., 5 d.; educ. Higher Grade Govt. Indian School, Durban, On death of father became a member of the firm of D. M. Timol. general merchants, of which he ia a partner; now trading as D. M. Timol & Sons. part in sport. Address: 116 Grey St., Phones 2-3181/2; Public activities: Member, N.LC., and African Muslim Society: also takes P.O. Box 211, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 17

240 THE SOUTH AFRICAN TIKLY, Amod Ismail, merchant : 6. ‘Wholvad, 1889; ¢. s. of late Hajee Ismail Tikly (see Who Has Whol: educ, Kholvad. Since 1907 has been in charge of the firm of Tikly, Pietersburg, being proprietor after father’s death. He is widely respected “by all sections of the community. Fy aphvides 2 Ine terested in all affairs of the commamtv, occupying several official positions. -lders L.O. Box’ 68, Phone 63, Market Street. Tel. ad, ‘Tih,’ Dieters: burg, Transvaal. TRIKAMDAS Rag- nath, merchant tailor ; & Bardoli, dist. Surat. 1915: “es. of Jate Ragnath Hari; ww., two s., one d.;) educ. Bardoli. Came to South Africa in 1925, settled in Johannesburg Started own business as merchant tailor in Vrededorp in 1935. Went to India, on re- turn established busi- ness at La Rochelle in 1937, tracing as La Rochelle Tailors. Publee actirales : Is interested in all public affairs of the Indian commynity. dddress Rochelle Court, 234, Johannesburg “Road, [a Rochelle, Johannesburg, Trans aal. MLEY, Prabhu- | J phat Bhagwanjee 6, Umit, Navasari, Baroda State, 1887, educ. Ami. Twice mar- ried: late Dahi, @ of Govind Maw jee, Sooraj @. of Narsi Pikir; six d., one <s. Came to South Africa in 1905, Janded at Durban. A year afterwards came to Port Elizabeth, where started own business. [n 1920 opened boot and shoe store, with which he is still connected. Public activities : Secty., Veda Dharma Sabha, 1912-15, its v.-chairman, 1915-16; 1920-26; chairman, Kshyatria Gujarati Mundal, 1920-26, its v.-chairman since 1928: ‘com- mittee member, Cape British Indian Counc) (Port Elizabeth Branch) ; chairman, Hindu Sabha. /lddvess - 125, Walmer Road, Phone 2996, Port Ehzabeth, Cape Province. INDIAN WHO’S WHO UKABHAI Bhana, merchant tailor ; b. Matvad, dist. Surat, 1900; ¢. s. of Bhana Bhagvan : »2., three s., one d.; educ. Matvad. Came to South Africa m f9F2, settled on Johannesburg. Started own business as mer- chant tailor in 1925 trading as B. Ukabh merchant tailor. Pabiic aelivilics lormer chairman of JXantha Nibhag Fund Com- mittee ; @ generons donor to all charitable appeals dddress : 313a, Commissioner Street, Phone 24-1844, Jeppe. Johannes- burg, Transvaal. Y AID, Ebrahim Mahomed; 0, Simlak, Surat, 1896; educ. Cawnpore and Delhi. Took Arabic & Urdu and special religious studies. Came to South Africa with parents. First in private employment. Started business as general dealer in Dullstroom in 1916. Developed a successful business, having the support of large chentele of Europeans, by whom he is highly respected. In India was secty, of the Anjuman Islam at Simlak. Takes a keen and intelligent interest in all public affairs, and is a person of progressive outlook. Address : P.O. Lox 6, Phone 6, Dullstroom, fransvaal. VALIALLAH, Ismail Mahomed ; 6. Kathor, Surat, 1899; >. of late Moulvi Mahomed Vali- allah, well known priest in South Africa; edite. Kathor and Mahome- dan Oriental College, Aligarh, now the Mus- fim University. Came to South Africa in 1919 as aneducated entrant, settled in Johannes- burg, where followed for a time the pro- fession of teaching. Now engaged as a property owner and dealer. Publhre activi- fies : Prominently connected with all public activities ; a founder and the chairman of the Onent Club, Johannesburg; chairman of the New Clare Stand- owners’ Assocn.; secty. of the Transvaal Muslim Assocn. and Surthee Madressa Islamia, New Clare. Publications : Tamaddune Islam (translation), Travels on Mauritius, Burma and Many Parts of India, also a contributor to the vernacular press in South Africa. In 1937 visited Madagascar, East Africa, Arabia, Egypt, Syria, Palestine, Iraq, Turkey—newspaper articles on recent tour. Address - 30, Gritfith Road, New Clare, Phone 35-9211, Johannesburg, Transvaal. — THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 24] KANJI VALLY FAMILY private study. Business: Came with parents to 3.A, in 1905. Started in Pretoria. After leaving school was associated in father’s general merchants’ business. Business genius demonstrating outstanding ability in the conduct of the busineas left tn his charge by his father. Director and secretary of several land and manufacturing companies. Public activities: Member of H.H. the Agakhan's Provincial Council of the Unien, President of H.H. the Agakhan's Educational Board, 1936-7: represented Pretoria at H.H. the Agakhan’s Jubilee Celebration in Nairobi. when he was honoured with the title of Huzur Mukhi by His Highness: president and founder of the Pretoria Muslim Club. First Indian to receive 5 diplomas and a_ silver medal from the Safety First Association, Johannesburg, 1934-8. Recipient of the King George VI Coronation Medal and a similar medal from H.H. the Agakhan on the occasion of his Golden Jubilec. Awarded Gold Medal for his work connected with HH. the Agakhan’s Volunteer Corps, Bombay. Special Medal from H.H. the Agakhan for distinguished services. Address: 133 Grand Street, Phowte 445i, Pretoria. Tranavaal, (in Johannesburg) Box 5445. ATE KANJI VALLY, former merchant, exporter and importer of Bombay and Johannesburg, South Africa; | b. Diu. Portuguese India, 1877: 2s. Business: Came to South Africa in 1695. Started in Pretoria, later moved to Johannesburg. Started own business aa wholesale merchant, On his arrival, traded as Kanii Vally Ebrahim & Co. Settled in Bombay. where traded as M | Ebrahim Rahimtula & Co. | Public activities: Secretary, general department of H.H._the Agakhan’s Recreation Club, Bombay; vice-preaidt. H.H. the Agakhan’'s Council, Pretoria. Philanthropist. in Bombay built houses at his own cost, letting them free of rent to the needy Muslims: while at the recreation club helped in converting numerous Hindus tu embrace Islam. Died in Johannesburg. October 10th, 1932. AHOMED ALLI KANJ! VALLY, manufacturer and property owner; b. Diu, Portugneae India, 1902: 2nd s. VI of late Kanji Valtly: educ. Pretoria Government School. Public activities: Sworn translator (in Guijerati and English) of the Supreme Court of S.A. (W.L.D,). Member of the Pretoria Muslint Club. Won two trophies for elocution at the Ismailia Edneational Soviety, Bombay, 1935-4. Address: 29 Davies Street, Doornfontein, Johanneshurg. Phone 22-7572. P.O. Box 544. Borivate. st KANJI VALLY, merchant; b. Kathiawar, India, 1895; e.3.0. late Kanji Vally; educ. Pretoria and Hirdua in embracing Islamic faith. Secretary and member of Agakhan’'s Provincial Council, Pretoria. Present at H.-H. the Agakhan’s Juhilee cele- bration at Nairobi, 1937, made Huzur Mukhi, vice-patron and a founder of the Pretoria Bluslim Club. Received King George VI's Coronation medal. Recipient of H.H. the Agakhan’s Qold| Medal. also special medal for distinguished services and medal for services rendered to H.H. the Aga- khan’s Volunteer Corps, Bombay. Was appointed commissioner of the Zanzi- har Supreme Council to aettle Khoia differences in Pretoria. Address: 109 Grand_ Street, Phone 5136. Pretoria: P.O. Box 644, Johannesburg, Tvl. and manufacturer: b. Kathia- war, India, 1894; y.s.o. late Virii Vally and the nephew of the late Kanji Vally; edue, Bombav. Business Came to S. in 1905 and joined the firm of Kanji Vally, becoming nart- ner, A sound businessman. Ia leading financier in the Khoja community. Director of progressive and land own- ing and manufacturing companics. Firat Indian who started and suc- ceeded in the candle manufacturing industry. fully acanainted with the techniaue of candle-making. Public activities. Sole organiser of H.H. the Agakhan’s Recreation Cluh (Johannesburg), headquarters in Bom- bay. Succeeded in converting many | \ and VIRJU VALLY, inerchant

---

## Page 18

242 THE SOUTH AFRICAN VALJEE, Hirjie; b. Thoyana, dist. Kathi- war, 1863. Came to South Africa, 1894, stayed first in Durban. Soon after came to Ladysmith, opening business as a jeweller. In 1905 acquired Trans- vaal domicile. Paid a short visit to India in 1906. On return has made Ladysmith his permanent South <Af- rican home. Public activities; Founder and president, Sanathan Dhrama Sabha; has made a generous don- ation towards erection of the Shree Geernara Soni Gratee Heep Vardhak Mandal at Porbandar, of which he is one of the trustees. Address : 302, Murchison St., Ladysmith, Natal. VALLABH, Motiram; es. of Vallabh Jaga; b. Navasari, 1900 ; educ. Navasari and Govt. Indian School, Jo- hannesburg. - Came to South Africa in 1913. On leaving school joined father’s business of merchant tailors, since 1923 has been in charge; was also pro- prietor of Vereeniging Silk Bazaar which he closed down in 1929. Public work - Has been a keen worker in the organisation of the be- spoke tailoring industry, . was sectv. of the Bespoke Tailoring Assocn. (Section “C”); ex-member, Industrial Council for the Bespoke Tailoring Industry; joint secty., Transvaal Indian Tailors Empleyers’ Assocn; joint secty., Transvaal Hindu Seva Samaj, 1938-39. Recreativons - Tennis, one of the founders of the Sarcenet T.C. Address : 78a, Harrison St., Phone 33-8422, Johannesburg, Transvaal. VARIAWA, Goolam Hoosen Suliman; b. Boodhan, dist. Surat, 1903: educ. Boodhan and Government Indian School Johannesburg. First in private employment in Johannesburg, in 1921 moved to Lichtenburg, where commenced business in partner~ ship in the firm name of C. Dawood & Co. Later started own business at Elandsputte diamond diggings, again went back to Lichtenburg, where opened general dealer's store in the name of G. Hassen & Co. In 1934 started wholesale business in Johannesburg. Captained the Oriental Muslim C.C. and F.C. at Lichtenburg. Address : (Bus.) G. Hassen & Co., 6, Diagonal Street, Johannesburg, Transvaal. VALOD, Mahomed Ebrahim ; presdt., Transvaal Indian Con- gress; partner in the firm of Mahomed Eb- rahim & Co., whole- sale merchants, 24, Becker Street (between Market and Commis- sioner Street}, Phone 33-6826, P.O. Box 1393 Tel. ad., ‘‘Gabaco,” Johannesburg, Trans- vaal. VANDAYAR, Poonoo- samy Rethinasamy ; &. Port Elizabeth, Mar. 6, 1910; 2nd s. of late V.P. Vandayar, of Port Elizabeth ; uz. Lutch- mee, d. of |. Reddy, of Port Ehzabeth, 1937; educ. DowerSchool, Port Elizabeth. On leaving school entered business. In 1932 started own business as fruiterer and general dealer, pro- prietor of the Imperial Fruiterers. Public ac- tivities : Committee member of the Siva Soobramier Aylam ; treas. of the Eastern Province Indian cricket and football Assocn.; plays soccer; a member of the Shamrocks T.C. Keenly interested in ail matters affecting the Indian community and is a promising young business man. Address : (Res.) 5, Farie Street. (Bus.) 126a, Russell Road, Phone 4866, Port IF Cape Province. VARACHIA, Ahmed Essop; 6. Ikhergam, dist. Surat, 1902; educ. Government Indian School, Johannesburg. Came to South Africa with parents in 1913, settled in Johannesburg. First worked at Potgietersrust and later at Nylstroom. After a short stay in India returned to South Africa, when started own business at Potgietersrust in 1927. Has shown considerable business acumen for in a short time had developed it into the leading Indian store in this area, Public activities : He takes a large share in the control of the Madressa at Potgictersrust; was treas. of the Potgietersrust Indian Cricket Club ; is interested in all welfare movements and has extended to them liberal financial support. While in this country he has not forgotten the claims of the Mosque and Madressa of his native town, to which he has been a generous donor. Addyess ; P.O, Box 20, Phone 88, Potgietersrust, Transvaal. VANDAYAR, Shum- mugam ; ¢. s. of late P. Vandayar, Port Elizabeth ; b. Port Elizabeth, May 8, 1908 ; educ. Dower School, Port Elizabeth; m. Streerengamall, 5th d. of VP. VYoudmarr, of Mauritius, 1936. Now engaged in busi- mess as fruiterer and confectioner, Proprie- tor of the Imperial fruit and confectionery stores. Public activilies Formec committee member of the Siva Soobramon- ium Aliayam; v.-captain of the Shamrocks Football Club; also a founder and the first captain of the Orient Indian Cricket Club. An active cricketer and footballer. Committee member, C.I.C. (P.E.}. Visited Mauritius, 1936. Address: 32, Walmer Rd., and 126a, Russell Rd., Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. VANMARE, Ganga- ram, produce dealer ; &. Kholvad, @sf. Surat, 1890: ¢. s. of late Vanmare Rama. w., one s., one d.: edie. Kholvad. Came to South Africa with father in 1902, settled in Greytown, where started business with uncle, as produce dealer which he is still con- ducting. Trading as G.G,. Vanmare. Piblee activilies Former secty. Greytown Dis- trict Indian Assoen. (now Natal Indian Con- gress} (Greytown Branch); hon. secty., Grevtown Indian School Board ; was treas. (now trustee), Hindu Sanathan Phrama Sabha; secty., Hindu Maha Sabha (Greytown Branch); was secty., then presdt. and now patron of the Greytown Indian Tennis Club; v.-presdt., committee member and delegate of Greytown Indian Football Assocn.; and takes part in all Indian public matters. Address : P.O. Box 20, Phone 34, Pine Street, Greytown, Natal. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO’S WHO 243 VARMA, Gangaram Rughoobeer ; «. s. of late Gangaram Cho- han, six s.; educ. Durban. Entered busi- ness in Durban, I9II, traded as bookseller, especially in Hindi lit- erature; tried to pro- mote its study amongst the Hindi section of the Indian community. After discontinuance of this business, continued other commercial ac- tivities. Prblic activi- ties Former presdt. of Hindu Samaj and occupied presidential chair of 18 other bodies; secty. of the Indian Market Stallholders’ and Squatters’ Assocn. for several years; associated with several Hindu religious preachers who visited South Africa. Keen on vernacular educa- tion; encouraged opening of such schools in various parts of Natal. Address - (Res.) 20], Alpine Road, Durban, Natal. VARMA, Makutram Rughoobeer, — school principal ; 4. Durban, April 21, 1912; 2. s. of G. Rughoobeer Var- ma; nm. 2nd ad. of B.A. Maghrajh, one d. : educ. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School, Durban. Passed T.4, 1932, the first year of the in- auguration of this ex- amination. Entered teaching profession, 1929, being assistant at the Hindi Govt. In- dian School, Spring- field. Transferred to Spearman Road Govt. Aided School; appointed head teacher at Umkomaas Govt. Aided Indian School, 1933. Public activities : Foundation member of the Rosebank Sporting Club (1929), now its v.-presdt and auditor; foundation member and ex-presdt., Rosebank Literary and Social Club; ex-presdt., Arya Sangeet Mundal; presdt. of Rastryia Deepavali Sporting Club, Durban; member of the Umkomaas Indian School Board; — secty.- presdt., Umkomaas United F.C.; ex-secty., Drift Indian School Committee; hon. member, Durban Lifesaving Surf Club, etc. Address : P.O. Roseneath, Umkomaas, Natal.

---

## Page 19

244 THE SOUTH AFRICAN VARMA, Ranchod- jee Govindjee ;b. Bal- sar, Surat, 1889: ¥. s. of Govindjee Bhikabhai Mianger family : edae. Balsar. Came to South Africa in 1907; settled in Port Elizabeth, where engaged in busi- ness. In 1921 started business as general dealer, at which he is still engaged; repres- enting brassware manu- -facturers of Benares, Moradabad and Jaipur. Also landed property owner. Public activs- fies» Former presdt. of the Wstyria Gugerati Mochi Mundal; treas. af th: Hindu Sabha; former asst. secty. of the Cape British Indian Council, now Cape Indian Congress: adviser to the Kstryia Mochi Mundal —Weenly interested in all Indian affairs. | Address’ 57, Varliament Street, Phone 4803, Port Elizabeth, Cape Province. VATHER, Damijee Somchand, merchant; 6. Jamnagar, Kathiwar 1897; e¢ s. of S. P. Vather, retired business man; four s., twod.; educ. York Road Govt. Indian School, Maritz- burg. Came to South Africa in 1911, settled with parents in Pieter- maritzburg. After schooling,in 1918 joincd father in business, being admitted partner in 1925, the business name then being changed to S. P. Vather & Son, general mer- chants, Since 1938 has become sole proprietor. Branch at Table Mountain, trading in the same firm name, of which he is also sole proprietor. Public activites : \.-presdt., Veda Dharma Sabha : patron, Hindu Youth Club and official of several other clubs, both social and sport. Address - 461, Church Street Phone 3258, Tel. ad., ‘‘Vather,”’ Pietermaritzburg, Natal. Readers ave referred to Section (1 for additional names. INDIAN WHO'S WHO VATHER, Somchand Panachand ; b. Jam- nagar, Kathiwar, 1876; edue Jamnagar; two s—Damjee Somchand Vather and Navinch- andra Somchand Vather. Came to South Africa in 187, settled first in Durban. In 1902 transferred interests to Maritzburg, and traded as a general deater ; in 1925 admitted his son D. S. Vather into the business, which in now known as of S. P. Vather & Son. In 1938 he retired. The business is being now carried on by his son, D. 5S. Vather. Public activities : Trustee of the Veda Dhrama Sabha, established by Swamt Shankeranard ; patron of the Vidya Parcharee Sabha; committee member of the South African Hindu Maha Sabha ; member of the N.I.C.; has bcen staunch worker in the field of social and religious advancement ; keen on the propagation of the vernacular languag a strong financial supporter of these causes. Address : 461, Church Street, Phone 3258, Pietermaritzburg, Natal. VAWDA, G. M.A., merchant ; b. New- castle, Natal, 1902; educ. St. Oswald's School, Newcastle. After a period of pri- vate employment started own business of general dealer at Newcastle. Public ac- tivities» Presedt., C.B. and S.LA. (Newcastle Branch) ; presdt., N.1. Angling Club, 1934 and 335; presdt., N.I. Rate- payers’ and Burgesses’ Assocn.; repstd. New~ castle at the S.A.LC. Conference, Capetown, 1925; repstd. Newcastle C.B. and $.LA., Durban , life v.-presdt., N.DI.F.A. and one of its founders: donor of the Vawda Floating Trophy ; patron, M.Y.M.A., 1935; chairman, Keception Committee to Baroda Girl Guides, 1935; presdt., Stella Indian F.C. :_ presdt., St. Oswald School's O.B.A.; v.-presdt., NI. Tennis League; v.-presdt.. N.LLF.A.: v.-presdt., Tahidial Anjuman Islam: signatory as treas. on address to H.R.H. Prince of Wales, H.E. the Governor- General, etc. Holds many other offices. Is an energetic member of the Indian community, social worker and a philanthropist. Hobby : Sport and public work. Address : P.O. Box 93, Phone 93, Newcastle, Natal, , VAWDA, Ismail S., merchant; 6. New- castle; educ. Newcastle and Durban. On leav- ing school joined father’s business. On father’s death became point owner with brother, of the firm, tracing as S. E. Vawda Public aetiviltes : Takes a leading part in all public affairs of the district of New- castle ; presdt., N.LA, (Newcastle Branch) ; repstd. Natal at many sessions of the S.A.L.C. Conferences ; chairman of the Newcastle Muslim Community, due in no small measure to his efforts that this organisation possesses a large block of buildings. Has contributed a generous amount to the building find of the Sastri College. Holds many other official positions on public bodies. Address : P.O. Box 6. Phone 44, 33a, AHen St., Neweastle, Natal, VYAS, Jatashanker Pranshanker, pro- prietor, Bookkeeping Agency, with business connections in the whole of the Transvaal: 6. Rajkot, dist. Kathi- war, 1878; edie. Raj- kot Wathiwar High School. After leaving school went to Southern India, remaining there for three years, Re- turned to Rajkot and in 1896 on advice of Mahatma {then Mr.} Gandhi, came to South Africa with his brothers. Was at the same school and a contemporary of the nationalist leader. Re- mained in South Africa until the Boer War, then went back to India. On outbreak of war was sent away to Lourenco Marques. Entered Natal in 1901; a year later returned to Transvaal, settling in Pretoria, where opened general dealer’s business and a book- keeping agency. Has heen closely associated with Mr. Gandhi, who stayed with him in Pretoria, He was in charge of the Pretoria office of Mr. Gandhi. During the Passive Resistance movement, his house was the Pretoria headquarters of the Mahatma. After the struggle, Mv. C. F. Andrews, who had arrived in South Africa, stayed at his residence in Pretoria He had been visited by Mr, Sastri and other Indian leaders. Though of a retiring disposition, he was second to none in working «uietly for the cause, contributing both time and large sums of money. Addyess : 356, Vermeulen Street, P.O. Box 892, Phone 597, Pretoria, Transvaal. 16 THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO 245 VITHAL, Mulji, mer- chant tailor; 6. Tim- berva, Station Chal- than, dist. Surat, 1881 ; e. s. of late Muljt Heera ; »7., one s., one d.: educ. Timberva. Came to South Africa in 1890, settled in Jo- hannesburg. Started own business as mer- chant tailor in 1912, first had place of busi- ness in Fordsburg; in 1923 removed to La Rochelle where has been since. Public activities: Prominent member of the Dargi Mundal; a generous donor to all public funds. Ad- dress: 214, Johannesbure Road. La Rochelle, Jo- hannesburg, Transvaal. 1906 ; educ. Government (ndian School, Johannesburg. After schooling. joined busi- ness of hts uncle, [. A. Cajee, at Krugersdorp, trading in firm name of The Bombay House {s now in charge of the business, as well as that of Ismail & Co., Krugers- dorp. and has branch at Vereeniging in name of Wadee & Co. He is enterprising in all public work and his South African outlook, in matters of public interest, is appreciated by all sections of the community. Is secty. of Krugersdorp Indian Assocn. and was one of those prominently associated in securing the sports ground for the [ndian community. [n all work affecting his community he has taken a ieading part ; keenly interested in sport, being secty (X<rugersdorp Indian Ottoman C.C. Made pilgrunage te Mecca, 1938; also visited Europe and India Address : 38, Market Street. Krugersdorp, Phone 201, P.O. Box 84, Krugersdorp, Transvaal. WCW toes Hajee Amod Ismail; 4. Transvaal, WILLIAMS, Veya- gulam Thaiveeia, B.A., M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O. (Dublin), medical practitioner ; 6. Isipingo, Natal, leb. 22, 1913; 2nd s, of A. J. Williams; edie. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School, Marine College, Durban and Trinity College, Dub- lin University. Public activities : Member, Philosophical Society, Dublin University ; repstd. University at cricket. Address - (Res.) 3, Hime Road, Phone 3-8233. (Surgery) 122a, Prince Edward Street, Phone 2-1655, Durban, Natal.

---

## Page 20

246 USUF, D. Fakir, Yo Commissioner for Oaths, 1935, Inter- preter-Clerk Dept. of justice, Union Public Service; retired, 1939 , 6. Durban, 1880; suc- ceeded father, who had retired on pension. as Indian [nterpreter at the Durban Prisons in 1900. Transferred in 1922 to Ladysmith as Justice Dept. Inter- preter on the Magis- = trate’s staff. In 1933 transferred to Durban Magistrate's Ofhce as Indian Interpreter-Clerk to the Ist and 2nd Civil Courts. Has takena prominent part in Muslim charitable organi- sations and together with another, founded the Society Anjuman-Esha-a-tul Islam of which he is trustee and chairman of the council. Was elected trustee to represent Colonial-born Muslims on the Board of Trustees of the Jumma Masjid Trust, the largest in South Africa. Later resigned owing to transfer to Ladysmith ; was a keen sportsman and played cricket and football as early as 1896. He is an ex- presdt. of the Natal Indian Football Assocn. and also of the Klip River District Indian Football Assocn. and is life v.-presdt. of the Nata! Indian Football Assocn. Was chairman of the Reception Committee of the All-India Soccer team when it visited South Africa in 1934. Is married and has eight children, including five sons who have distinguished themselves in various sports. Two of them have had inter-provincial honours, one has gained his South African cap. Hobbies : Shooting and fishing. Address: 1160, Main Road, Mayville, Phone 8-8831, Durban, Natal, YUSUF, Mahomed Abed, building con- tractor; 6. Durban, June 26, 1909; 2ud s. of Fafir Yusuf, civil servant, of Durban: educ. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian Schoo), Durban. On leaving school apprenticed in the building trade, 1923. Started as a building contractor in Durban, 1930. One of the leading Indian building C6Rtractors in Durban, responsible for the erection of Indian building landmarks in Durban. Business name. M. A. Yusuf. Public activi- fies : Keen sportsman, repstd. Klip River District in Inter-Bistrict soccer and cricket. Takes a keen interest in all social and public affairs. Address - (Res.) 1156, Main Road, Mayville. (Bus.) 45, Lorne Street, Phone 2-0628, Durban, Natal, THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO YUSUF, Shaik Ab- dulla, commercial re- presentative ; 4. Dur- ban, Natal, May 6, 1901; e@. s. of Fafir Yusuf, retired civil servant, Durban: m. @. of Shaik Abdool, merchant, of Dann- hauser, four s., three d.: educ. Carlisle Street Govt. Indian School, Durban. On leaving school entered com- mercial career. Con- nected with the firm of Lochhat Brox , Ltd, Public activities - Member, Natal Indian Congress; interested in all Indian public affairs; formerly keen soccer player, Tepresenting Durban in soccer on two occasions. Represented Natal in South African Soccer Tournament at Port Elizabeth, 1924, Club: Orient. _4ddress - (Res.) 106, Mansfield Road, Phone 4-6714. (Bus.) Lochhat Bros., 104, Commercial Road. Durban, Natal. YUSUF FAMILY YUSUF, Maho- med Idris ; school- master ; 6. Durban, Natal, Aug. 9, 1915; 4th s. of Fafir Yusuf, civil servant > educ. Sastri College, Durban, passed T3, 1935. Ap- pointed on the teaching staff of the Govt. In- dian School, Bulawayo, 1936. Public activities - A keen sportsman, ob- tained the S. African cap at soccer, all-India, 1934 | represented Durban at cricket and football in senior inter- town matches on sev- eral occasions. Organised first touring teams, cricket and tennis, of the Sastri College to the Transvaal, 1933 and 1934. Represented Natal in the Sam China Cup Tournament at Johannesburg, 1935. Selected to represent Natal at tennis, 1935: Victor Iudorum Sastri College, 1933-34-35. At Bulawayo, Secretary of the all-Indian Sports Union ; captain of the Bulawayo Inter-district teams, football and cricket; captain of the Marigold T.C. In 1936 created what is a record in cricket by scoring 412 not out in a single innings. A keen social worker and connected with the Bulawayo Indian Muslim Society, Instructor to the Indian School Dramatic Club. "Recreations < Tootball, cricket, tennis and angling. Clubs : Empire F.C.: Schools C.C. and Marigold T.C. Address : Box 931, Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia. THE SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN WHO'S WHO INDIAN. WHO'S WHO of SOUTHERN AND NORTHERN RHODESIA NYASALAND AND PORTUGUESE EAST AFRICA

---

